Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239
DOI 10.1007/s10707-009-0083-6

Mastering map scale: balancing workloads using display
and geometry change in multi-scale mapping

Cynthia A. Brewer & Barbara P. Buttenfield

Received: 10 October 2007 / Revised: 6 October 2008
Accepted: 31 March 2009 / Published online: 6 May 2009
# The Author(s) 2009. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract This paper builds on a body of European research on multiple resolution data bases
(MRDBs), defining a conceptual framework for managing tasks in a multi-scale mapping
project. The framework establishes a workload incorporating task difficulty, time to complete
a task, required level of expertise, required resources, etc. Project managers must balance the
workload among tasks with lower and higher complexity to produce a high quality
cartographic product on time and within budget. We argue for increased emphasis on the role
of symbol design, which often carries a lower workload than multi-scale mapping based
primarily on geometry change. Countering expectations that combining symbol change with
geometry change will increase workloads, we argue that in many cases, integration of the two
can reduce workloads overall. To demonstrate our points, we describe two case studies drawn
from a recent multi-scale mapping and database building project for Ada County, Idaho. We
extend the concept of workload balancing, demonstrating that insertion of Level of Detail
intermediate scales can further reduce the workload. Previous work
(LoD) datasets at
proposing LoDs has not reported empirical assessment, and we encourage small and large
mapping organizations to contribute to such an effort.

Keywords Multi-scale mapping . Multi-resolution database . MRDB . Generalization .
Cartography . Map design . Workload . Level of detail database . LoD

1 Introduction

Despite the dream of generating cartographic base maps spanning all display scales by
using a single detailed database, reference mapping frequently continues to be conducted

C. A. Brewer (*)
Department of Geography, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
e-mail: cbrewer@psu.edu

B. P. Buttenfield
Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
e-mail: babs@colorado.edu

222

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

to create map products at a series of scales that

using multiple databases pre-compiled at standardized resolutions. This procedure makes it
more difficult
reflect consistent
symbolization and generalization strategies. It also complicates production workflow (the
sequence of tasks required to create a product) as well as production workload (the amount
of labor, time, and skill). Moreover, supporting map products at display scales that differ
from those suited to compiled database resolutions often requires deriving some layers at
intermediate map scales, creating specialized in-house product databases, and maintaining
multiple resolution cartographic databases. Changes in symbol design and elimination of
feature types support mapping through a range of scales, and this paper is about planning
for the interaction of these display changes with geometry changes for complete multi-scale
mapping.

Final cartographic products often are designed for a specific print media or display scale.
In contrast, data contributing to these products may have been compiled at a resolution
commensurate with mapping across a wide range of scales. For example, national mapping
agencies (NMAs) by convention compile data at resolutions (called “anchors” in this paper)
suited to a series of standard mapping scales. NMA anchor data support a large proportion
of mapping data used in many GIS applications. The availability of anchor compilations
and of national map products varies from one NMA to another (Table 1).

The number of anchor compilations and the compilation resolutions reflect several
considerations, and these will have differing impacts on an organization’s workload. One
factor is the size of the geographic footprint to be mapped. Countries such as Great Britain
produce anchor compilations no smaller than 1:10,000. Larger footprints, such as Germany,
require a smallest anchor scale of 1:1,000,000. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) maps a

Table 1 Examples of scales used by national mapping agencies, comparing resolutions of anchor databases
and corresponding scales of derived topographic database and/or map products

Footprint

Anchor Compilations

Derived data and map products

Spain (Catalonia example)

Denmark

France

Germany

Great Britain

Sweden

Switzerland

United States

5
50

250

10

100

10

50

10

250
1000

10

25

200

24

100

2000

1.25, 2.5, 10

5, 10, 25
50, 100

250

10, 25, 50

100, 250, 1000

25, 50

100, 120, 250, 500, 1000

10, 25, 50, 100

250, 500
1000

10, 25, 50, 250

10, 50, 100, 250, 1000

25, 50, 100

200, 500, 1000

24

100, 250

2000

For simplicity, we are referring to the anchor data and derived products in terms of scale. Scale numbers are
denominators of representative fractions in thousands (for example, ‘25’ indicates 1:25,000). The table
(except the U.S. summary) is derived from Stoter’s 2005 summary [22].

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

223

very large geographic footprint and consequently produces topographic data anchors out to
1:2,000,000 [24].

Another factor affecting the choice of anchors relates to data production and maintenance
policies and procedures in place at an agency [22]. For example, Great Britain’s Ordinance
Survey maintains a single, variable resolution anchor database containing features compiled at
1:1,250; 1:2,500; and 1:10,000. Compilation resolution varies for urban and rural features, for
example. In contrast, Switzerland’s national mapping agency, swisstopo, maintains two
anchors with fixed resolution compiled at 1:25,000 and 1:200,000.

A third factor relates also to work practice, specifically to how database and map product
updates are coordinated; and the various mapping agencies show great diversity. For
example, the ICC national mapping agency in Catalonia, Spain maintains four anchor
databases. One of these (1:25,000) is derived by generalizing another (1:5,000); however
the two anchors are updated separately. In Denmark, the national mapping agency KMS
updates its 1:10,000 anchor data every five years, and its 1:100,000 anchor data every six
years. The USGS updates portions of all three anchors by focusing on fast-changing
(urbanized) areas at all scales, rather than updating an entire anchor all at once. Map tiles in
some areas of the country are updated every few years, while other updates occur every few
decades. Over time, one should expect that anchors updated independently will begin to
diverge in content, geometry and spatial relationships [22].

In this paper we will apply the term scale to map products and resolution to databases
following conventions in database research [17]. Readers unfamiliar with cartographic
terminology describing common generalization operations should refer to [13, 18, 19].
Cartographic symbol designs change for map products intended for smaller scales. The
resolution or granularity of features in an anchor compilation is altered by data modeling and
feature generalization to modify the amount of detail. The complexities of creating multiple
scales of map products from a series of anchors compiled at diverse resolutions raises
link feature representations across
significant challenges to implement procedures that
database versions. Another challenge is to maintain representational consistency across map
products, in accord with standardized or semi-standardized graphical ontologies in use at
federal, regional, and local mapping houses. It
to maintain database
consistency during feature updates. Map and database maintenance and update operations
present NMAs with a host of compelling problems for which there remains no single solution
[18: p.24], and these problems can complicate workflows. As a consequence, multi-scale
discussions have transformed into multi-resolution and multi-representation discussions.
Multi-Representation Data Base (MRDB) is the emergent label applied to databases designed
for multi-scale mapping [14, 18, 21]. Examples of MRDB projects include ATKIS [1] and
GiMoDig [12] and are described for countries throughout Europe [2, 7, 23, 26].

is also important

Some MRDB strategies derive an intermediate-scale, product-specific database called a
Digital Cartographic Model (DCM) [11] that contains a complete version of data,
generalized for appropriate display at a specific mapping scale and containing cartographic
symbology as well as feature descriptions and attribution.

Another MRDB strategy is nicknamed a “Level of Detail” database (LoD). These
databases contain subsets of database layers,
for example, hydrographic channels
generalized as line features. LoDs are preprocessed to support mapping at intermediate
resolutions when feature generalization requires intensive computation (e.g., derivation of
contours), when a high degree of cartographic expertise is needed (e.g., label placement,
feature displacement), or for features whose map appearance or database geometry is quite
sensitive to scale change (e.g., terrain or hydrography). The LoD concept is discussed by
several authors (e.g., [9, 10, 15, 16, 27]), and it was presaged by Timpf and Frank [25].

224

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

Neither DCMs nor LoDs may be as complete or as accurate as Digital Landscape Models
(DLMs), which contain data as captured but do not carry cartographic symbology [14].

The LoD purpose is to speed mapping and reduce map production workloads through all
map scales. An effective LoD should support products across a range of mapping scales, and
the magnitude of the range will depend on the data domain (Table 2). For example, an LoD
for terrain contours or for hydrography will likely span a smaller scale range than an LoD for
transportation, simply because naturally occurring features tend to be more sensitive to scale
change than roads and railroads which are built to standard engineering specifications.

The automated production of a series of LoDs from national datasets facilitates varied
new modes of representation. These new modalities include PDAs and other mobile
devices,
in-car navigation, and on-demand web mapping [5, 16, 19, 20]. Technical
challenges thus become adaptive zooming, variable scale mapping, and on-demand or on-
the-fly production of acceptable graphic displays, rather than high-precision printed maps.
This paper defines a model for managing tasks in a multi-scale mapping project. The
framework establishes a workload incorporating task difficulty, time to complete a task, and
required level of expertise. We argue that
the attention paid to data modeling and
generalization in a majority of published MRDB solutions neglects the fact that in many
situations, mapping at multiple scales can proceed effectively using display changes either
by themselves or in conjunction with generalization. From a workload standpoint, symbol
modification is often less intensive than is modifying data geometry. Countering
expectations that combining symbol change with geometry change will increase workloads,
we argue that in many cases, integration of the two can reduce workloads overall. To
demonstrate our points, we describe two case studies drawn from a recent multi-scale
mapping and database building project for Ada County, Idaho. We extend the concept of
workload balancing, demonstrating that insertion of LoD data at intermediate scales can
further reduce the workload.

We agree with the widely held opinion that tasks involving manual intervention will
customarily carry a higher workload than automation. Tasks also differ in level of
difficulty. For the sake of argument, we assign three levels of difficulty to any (manual
or automated) task. One can think of the levels based on several parameters, for
to implement
example,
manually or to code for automated change; or the challenge to integrate the changes
into an existing map product design. Project managers must balance the workload
among tasks with lower or higher difficulty to produce a high quality product on time and
integrating, and
within budget. This is at once a mix of prioritizing, optimizing,

length of time to complete the task;

level of required skill

Table 2 Relative magnitudes and usable scale ranges for a hypothetical set of LoD layers

Data domain

Largest to smallest
scales

Magnitude of scale
support

Usable scale
range

Terrain and hydrography

Transportation and buildings

Thematic layers (vegetation, soils)

1:30,000–1:60,000
1:250,000–1:500,000
1:1,000,000–1:2,000,000
1:30,000–1:150,000
1:30,000–1:300,000

~2x

~4x-5x

~4x-10x

30,000
250,000

1,000,000

120,000

270,000

The scale support column summarizes the amount of change for which mapping in each domain holds up
well. For example, human layers such as transportation and buildings can be reduced four or five times from
their compilation scale and support readable mapping.

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

225

minimizing. We utilize the term workload balancing to emphasize that each criterion in
the mix must be balanced against the others, throughout the range of resolutions for
which products must be produced.

Our paper demonstrates how to incorporate display change into workload balancing. We
argue that symbol change can balance or reduce overall workloads for multi-resolution
cartographic data modeling, and we have not seen this finding reported by other researchers
to date. In the next section we propose a general model of workload balancing, discussing
how changes to display and geometry interact across mapping scales. We justify our
position using empiric examples from a recent project to create a database in support of
multi-scale, multi-purpose mapping for Ada County, Idaho [3, 4]. To set a problem-centered
context for our discussion, we begin with one of these examples.

2 Case study one: balancing display and geometry change

Decisions about modifying data from its anchor resolution (i.e., compiled resolution) to
make maps at other scales can involve display and/or geometry changes, each of which
impacts the production workload. The workload may consist of applying data modeling
algorithms, simplifying coordinates, and other forms of geometry modification. The
workload may also involve symbol redesign, application of different style sets, or hand-
editing symbol shapes and styles.

Modifications to feature geometry may include:

Interpolating new isolines from a DEM (e.g., changing from a 3m to 20m contour interval)

& Resampling geometry (e.g., DEM resampling for smoother relief shading)
&
& Changing dimensionality (e.g., collapsing building footprints to point features)
&
Simplifying lines (e.g., reducing coordinates along an intricate coastline)
&
Summarizing many small features with a larger areal feature (e.g., aggregating many
small ponds to create a ‘wetland area’ polygon)

& Removing features below a size threshold from the database (e.g., islands less than one

square mile in area are eliminated).

Modifications to feature display may include:

& Changing colors for fills and lines to those over which type is readable
&
& Changing marker symbols’ size, shape, hue, and lightness so they do not obstruct

Increasing the spacing in a boundary dash pattern to reveal underlying roads

adjacent features

& Adding line casings to allow labels to be placed inside road areas with no road fill color.
& Removing polygon outlines on a small-scale map so lines do not obscure small polygon fills
& Changing drawing order (e.g., moving boundaries below roads)
& Replacing features with labels (e.g., positioning building names at building locations

but not symbolizing buildings)

& Eliminating classes of features (e.g., eliminate all local roads from the map by specifying no

road symbol while the features remain in the database).

Figure 1a shows a small map layout derived from the Ada County Idaho database at
1:5K, and 1b shows an unedited reduction to 1:15K. The map area includes a portion of a
housing development, two large buildings, small water bodies, and a stream. Features in
Fig. 1b are reduced in size but line symbols are not. For example, the 3-point line weight
used for roads remains at a width of 3 points in 1b.

226

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

Fig. 1 Map of a housing development at 5K a and reduced to 15K b

Figure 2 shows three 1:15K versions of Fig. 1b with different mapmaking solutions that
preserve readability after reducing the scale of the map. Figure 2a shows adjustments to
only display aspects of the map, Fig. 2b shows geometry changes, and 2c combines both
geometry and scale changes. Example display changes are making lines thinner and
removing outlines to reduce clutter. Geometry changes include collapsing areal features to
lines, eliminating features based on size and local density (removing isolated buildings that
are not part of a housing cluster), aggregating building clusters to an areal feature,
displacing adjacent features, and simplifying shapes. The geometry changes in Fig. 2b
include a small amount of design work because the housing area fill color was also set.

Modifications may require increased levels of expertise, time, computing cycles, and
thus cost; these are the consequences of scale change. Every change will require integration
to sustain the visual hierarchy, and for some tasks,
integration requirements may be
intensive or extensive. In the case of feature displacement, shifting a feature in one layer
may activate the need to adjust feature label positions, possibly for more than one feature
layer. A resampled DEM may result in the need to regenerate contour lines, or displace
transportation features.

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

227

Fig. 2 Redesign of Fig. 1 map for 15K is shown with display changes only a, geometry changes b, and both
display and geometry changes c. Specific changes are listed next to each map

3 Model of workload balancing

Our model assumes that data are produced at one or more specific compilation resolutions,
anticipating the generation of varied general- or special-purpose products. The compiled
data anchors the workload in the sense that it requires a minimum of work to create a
product at the anchor’s mapping scale. The general form of this schematic is adapted from
[8] (additionally reported in [7] and [9]), who used complexity on their vertical axis. We
utilize the concept of workload instead of complexity, recognizing that workload tasks may
differ for various modifications.

Our workload model distinguishes between workloads associated with modifying the
display and the geometry. One could question whether display modification is possible in a
commercial mapping house or national mapping agency where standardized legend designs
are carefully regulated. Even where legend regulation is strict, scale changes often result in
elimination of specific feature types and categories. An example is given of multi-scale
mapping of transportation [26], where Dutch Topography Service spatial data codes (Tdn
codes) for transportation features are tagged to specific mapping scales. As the scale is
reduced, entire classes of features (paths, streets, secondary roads, and main roads) are
successively dropped. This type of elimination modifies the display and not the database.

228

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

The workload balancing model is intended to guide project managers in planning
staffing and resource needs, and project completion timeframes and horizons. To explain
the model, we sketch generic workload curves with shapes that are not empirically verified.
The conceptual model in Fig. 3 illustrates that mapmaking workloads increase for products
generated at scales between anchor databases.

As with [9], units on both axes are ordinal. The horizontal axis represents the entire
range of scales for which an organization creates map products. Squares represent anchor
resolutions at which compiled databases are available. The vertical axis represents relative
workload, including processing complexity, time, skill level, and tool sophistication (each
increasing mapmaking cost). In this initial figure, we separate the workloads for modifying
geometry (Fig. 3a) and for modifying the display (Fig. 3b).

Using these hypothetical curves, we argue that workload changes are asymmetrical
between anchor compilations. Figure 3a demonstrates that mapmaking at scales near anchor
database resolutions requires minimal adjustments to feature geometry. As map scales
depart from the anchor data, the amount of adjustment increases, and the workload rises
accordingly. Figure 3b demonstrates that a mapmaker may produce satisfactory map
products at intervening scales by modifying map symbols only.

Workloads drop as map scale approaches any anchor compilation because databases are
often used for mapmaking at scales larger than their intended resolution, but not much
larger. The workload never drops to zero, even when mapping at an anchor scale: some
generalization and/or symbol design will always take place. The dashed segments of the
to generate a
curve in 3b indicate that display change alone may not be sufficient
satisfactory map at a map scale distant from anchor data at finer resolution, even with the
possibility of drawing upon another anchor dataset at a coarser resolution.

A question that must be asked of the workload balancing concept (whether applied to
geometry or display changes) is how to determine at what mapping scale to make changes.
A recent project [3] demonstrates that such determination may be arrived at empirically.
Mapping data compiled at USGS standard mapping scales were used to create reference
maps for a range of scales (10K to 5M) crossing orders of magnitude with changes in map
display using symbol modification and feature elimination.

When modifying both geometry and display to make maps at multiple scales, the workload
for each category of change is reduced. We have sketched this workload reduction in Fig. 4,
with hypothetical curves of similar shape but lower amplitude through the range of mapmaking
scales. Figure 4a shows the amount of geometry modification (such as line simplification) is

Fig. 3 Lines sketching the work-
load required for mapmaking
through all scales using anchor
databases compiled at selected
resolutions

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

229

Fig. 4 The workload amplitude may be reduced overall when display changes and geometry changes are
applied in conjunction. a shows that fewer geometry changes are needed when display changes are also made
during mapmaking at each scale. b shows that fewer display changes are needed when geometry changes are
also made

reduced when the display is also modified (such as by modifying line widths). Likewise,
Fig. 4b shows that the amount of display modification is reduced when geometry is also
adjusted. For example, road lines may need less adjustment in width if adjacent buildings are
collapsed from areas to point features as scale decreases. Comparing Fig. 3 with Fig. 4, one
sees that the display change curve is not dashed in Fig. 4b, to reflect that display changes
through the whole scale range will be satisfactory when geometry is also adjusted.

The two workload curves from Fig. 4 are overlaid in Fig. 5a and integrated (summed) in
Fig. 5b. In Fig. 5a, the peaks along the workload curve for geometry modification (thin
black line) are more skewed than the curve for display modification (gray line) to suggest
that as the intended production scale moves farther away from its finer resolution anchor
compilation, geometry adjustments comprise a larger component of the workload. When
both types of operations are involved at mapping scales adjacent to anchor resolutions, the
proportions for display change and geometry are the same. For example, the workload
required to generate a set of contours should be similar to the workload required to select
and symbolize index contours.

One would expect that the overall workload for display change combined with geometry
change should be greater than the workload for either in isolation. We propose the paradox

Fig. 5 The thin line in 5a represents geometry changes and the gray line represents display changes (shown
separately in Fig. 4). The line in 5b represents the total workload when modifying both geometry and display
during mapmaking through all scales using existing databases. That is, the 5b line shows the sum of
component workloads shown in 5a—the integrated workload

230

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

that this interaction is not borne out in practice. Instead, we argue that combining the two
types of modification reduces workloads overall. In our model, the integrated workload is
expected to be lower in amplitude than curves for either of these efforts on their own.
Figure 6 overlays the curve from Fig. 5b on each individual workload curve shown in
Fig. 3. We argue that when geometry and display changes are integrated, the two types of
activity complement each other, in effect balancing the overall workload. For example,
applying a thinner line weight or a smaller marker symbol size will in some cases obviate
the need for feature displacement.

Neither the display or geometry modifications described by the curves in the above
figures include label placement. Map labeling is a time-consuming aspect of cartography.
We propose that most labeling could be completed with a single fine-resolution database of
place names and that workload decreases at smaller mapping scales (Fig. 7). Fewer types of
features would be labeled, though more of each may be present within the map extent.
More overlap between labels may also need to be resolved at smaller scales.

4 Comparing workload magnitudes for case study one

The tasks listed in Fig. 2 vary in the amount of work required to carry them out and may be
generally classed as easy, moderately difficult, and difficult. For example, changing a
display by making a color change is easy, but adjusting colors and lines to produce the
desired visual hierarchy among a set of new symbols is more difficult. Processing that
changes the geometry of the data is of varying difficulty to use and some geometry changes
require hand editing given current tool capabilities. For example, simplifying the angular
shapes of buildings within one layer is easier than displacing streams to improve vertical
integration between the hydrography and road layers. To ease comparison of mapmaking
difficulty, we assign approximate units of difficulty to the tasks used to construct maps
shown in Fig. 2. Easy tasks require one unit of work, where units are relative and
approximate aggregates of the time, expertise, and processing demands of a task.
Moderately difficult tasks are assigned two units of work and difficult tasks are assigned
three. These workload units allow very rough summaries of mapmaking workloads.

Fig. 6 The bold black line represents the integrated display and geometry workload. It is compared to the
workloads for changing only geometry (line from Fig. 3a) or only display (line from 3b). The workload for
geometry-only modification exceeds the integrated workload midway between scales and is less than the
display/geometry workload near product scales a. The display-only workload always equals or exceeds the
integrated workload b

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

231

Fig. 7 Workload for labeling is reduced at smaller scales because fewer labels for fewer feature classes are
usually involved. Databases of feature names for large-scale mapping may supply labels for a wide range of
scales (represented by a single square on the horizontal scale axis). The labeling workload is not included in
the workloads discussed in previous figures

Summary totals in Table 3 provide a sense of the workload reduction offered by
mapmaking that combines display and geometry change. Display changes in Fig. 2a total to
10 workload units, and the geometry changes for 2b also total to 10 units. In contrast, the
combination of display and geometry changes in Fig. 2c total to 6 workload units. All three
design solutions are viable but the last one is less work because it has the most balanced
workload.

One might argue that modeling a different set of weights could result in a different
workload estimation, and this is of course absolutely correct. Project managers will

Table 3 Workload comparison for display and geometry change

Task difficulty

Task description

Display changes in Fig. 2a:

select buildings on size (do not display smaller buildings)

Geometry changes in Fig. 2b:

eliminate buildings on local density (remove small isolated buildings)

construct hull around dense area of buildings

Both geometry and display changes in Fig. 2c:

thinner road line

road color change

no road casing

no building outline

no stream outline
stream color change

design correct visual hierarchy

total workload

collapse stream to centerline

displace road from stream
simplify largest buildings

total workload

select buildings by size

displace road from stream

simplify all building shapes

no building outline

total workload

1

1

1

1

1

1
1

3

2

2

2

3
1

1

3

1

1

6

10

10

232

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

establish weighting strategies based on the types of products they generate, at specified
mapping scales, depending on staffing levels and expertise and on the time available to
complete production. In some situations, a manager may be short on staff but have a longer
production timeline. In other projects, the purchase of a specialized type of equipment may
be balanced against outsourcing one or more project tasks; and decoupling the tasks in
terms of time, expertise, or processing needs can further refine the workload balancing
model. This paper does not intend to standardize relative weights for specific display or
geometry modifications, rather to demonstrate how the workload balancing model can
systematically guide managers in deciding whether to modify display, geometry, or both.

5 Case study two: using an LoD in workload balancing

An example from the hydrography layer of the Ada County data demonstrates multiple
changes to geometry and how an LoD might fit into the work of preparing a map at a
smaller scale. Figure 8a shows a segment of the hydrography at 1:5K and Fig. 8b shows the
generalization of the 1:5K data suited to preparing a map at 1:24K. Small text notes within
Fig. 8a highlight example changes to the geometry made in producing Fig. 8b. Two nearby
lines are merged into one representative line, a small island is eliminated from the database
because of its size, a narrow pond is collapsed to a line, inlet details on a large island are
simplified, and an island is displaced from the river edge.

The 1:24K LoD shown in Fig. 8b can support mapmaking for a range of scales with
display changes alone. The LoD can also be generalized incrementally to support mapping
at still smaller scales that require further change in geometry for readable maps. To
demonstrate, further generalization of the 1:24K LoD is shown in Fig. 8c for mapmaking at
1:40K. For example,
incremental generalization step from the 1:24K data to 1:40K
mapping shows additional aggregation of adjacent small ponds into larger areas and
simplification of lines throughout the map. Less work in geometry change is required to
make the next map with the LoD already available. An LoD requires initial work to produce
but, if it is well placed within the range of scales between anchor data resolutions, it allows
additional geometric processing of low workload when making multiple maps of varied
scales. Figure 9 shows the original 5K data at 1:40K to emphasize the overall amount of
change these two generalization steps have produced.

6 Continued modeling of workload balance

LoDs are shown within our schematic scale/workload diagram in Fig. 10 using open
squares between the existing databases (black squares). An LoD effectively provides an
additional anchor database, possibly storing a subset of original data. The workload dips at
LoD resolutions and the amplitude of the entire curve is reduced. One benefit of adding
preprocessed LoDs to a mapmaking workflow would be reducing effort to levels that can be
managed by a mapmaking group.

For example, a small cartography company may not own high-end computers or
sophisticated processing extensions to software, they may not know how to implement some
geometric processing functions, or they may not have the time to iterate on parameter settings
to optimize to a suitable generalization of the database. The mapmakers may not have
permissions to change a database used for mapmaking, or they may not know how to use
editing tools to customize a product at a particular map scale. They may also choose to hire a

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

233

Fig. 8 Hydrography data is shown at three scales, 1:5K, 1:24K, and 1:40K. a presents original data at 1:5K.
b is the LoD at 1:24K, created from the 1:5K data. c shows further simplification and aggregation of features
from the 1:24K LoD for production of a map at 1:40K

234

Fig. 9 The 1:5K data shown at
1:40K with no geometry change.
Compare this map to Fig. 8c to
see the many changes to the
database with incremental gener-
alization. The white square out-
lines the area shown in Fig. 8a

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

consultant to complete processing for which they do not have time or in-house skills, and this
increases mapmaking costs (one aspect of workload). These are example limitations that
affect real-world cartography. These limitations are summarized with the horizontal dashed
line midway up the workload axis. The addition of LoDs damps down the cartographic
production workload below this hypothetical threshold of skill and processing.

For the multi-scale mapping project with Ada County data ([4, 6]) we built draft-version
LoDs for hydrography to suit mapping at scales of 20K and 80K. These LoDs replaced the
original anchor data when maps reached the limits of readability during redesign using
display changes only. We applied a limited set of operators, eliminating small disconnected
stream segments, eliminating small ponds and islands, identifying complete centerline paths
for braided stream channels, replacing thin stream channel polygons with linear features,
simplifying linear features and polygon outlines, and correcting stream network connections.
We consider our LoDs as draft versions, since our generalization workflow did not include
data modeling refinements such as amalgamating proximal polygons, resolving spatial
conflicts by displacement, or re-establishing logical stream order sequences. Our intention
was to demonstrate that geometry changes could extend the limits of readability while
reducing overall workloads for map production at smaller scales. Insertion of the draft LoDs
at the problematic mapping scales introduced coordinate geometry with an appropriate level
of detail, thus obviating the need to further fine-tune line weights, color choices, and symbol
outlines to reduce or obscure the visual noise of overly fine details in the anchor version. This
effort balanced the symbol modification workload, facilitating the design of hydrographic
symbols holding a logical degree of visual prominence in the figure-ground hierarchy.

We generalize results of our LoD exercise in Fig. 11. The figure shows workloads for
mapmaking at two scales, a large-scale example (Y) and a smaller-scale example (Z). In
U.S. mapping, these scales may differ by orders of magnitude. The X and Y examples are
represented by vertical gray lines intersecting the workload curves, and they do not coincide

Fig. 10 LoDs store preprocessed geometry changes for intermediate scales between existing database
resolutions. The preprocessing they offer reduces the workload for mapmaking at scales distant from initial
anchor databases, reducing the workload for selected scale products. (For simplicity of explanation, the same
reduction is shown between all LoDs though this benefit may vary through the scale range.)

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

235

Fig. 11 Relative workloads for
mapmaking at two scales (Y and
Z) are highlighted. Example Y
requires large changes in geome-
try alone a or larger changes in
display alone b using the finer-
resolution database for map pro-
duction. Combining both display
and geometry change reduces the
overall workload c. Example Z, at
a smaller scale, is positioned
where workloads are very high
for mapmaking with geometry
change alone a and cannot be
solved by display change alone
(dashed line in b). Working from
an LoD at a nearby resolution
reduces the workload for both
examples d

with an anchor database resolution or a derived LoD. Working from LoD resolutions,
however, reduces the workload (Fig. 11d) when compared to mapmaking by modifying
geometry alone (10a), display characteristics alone (10b), or both (10c).

7 Discussion and concluding comments

This paper makes the case for anticipating and balancing workloads for multi-scale reference
base mapping. It extends European research on cartographic workloads by incorporating
changes to the map display (such as symbol redesign or modification) with changes to feature
geometry that take place in both model generalization and in map generalization. The paper
demonstrates two case studies that isolate workloads for display modification from workloads
for changes to feature geometry. We propose that display change and geometry change should
in practice complement each other, and reduce rather than amplify overall workloads.

To reflect geographic processes in multi-scale mapping, each change carries with it some
‘consequence’ for the mapmaking workload. Changes to feature geometry often require
more effort (i.e., carry higher consequences) than changes to symbology. A worst-case
scenario might interleave two data sets compiled at disparate scales, such as collating roads
from a federal data source with on-ramps and clover-leaf ramps compiled from a state or
local databases. In this scenario, the workflow might require a datum shift or projection
change, reducing coordinate density, correcting conflation error among the data sources,
this prior to symbolization—clearly a
matching discordant attribute domains, and all

236

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

significant consequence for cartographic workload. The cartographer’s goal is to modify the
view on the data while preserving geographic logic and validity and producing a map
product of suitable quality. In short, the ‘consequences’ of scale change will vary with the
map purpose, map audience, modality of use, and available anchor databases.

We point to several gaps in the current work, specifically to tasks in cartographic
production workload that are not addressed by our conceptual framework. First is the issue
of automation. There is general agreement that the extent to which one can automate
display and geometry modification is likely proportional to reducing work, overall. One
must of course account for the time required to adopt an existing automation solution, in the
form of training staff to utilize new software or in the form of changing production
sequences. If automated solutions are developed in-house, this may incur a one-time
workload increase, which must be balanced against the number of times such a solution will
be invoked for any subsequent product development.

A second gap in our work relates to data updates, which should be incorporated into an
operating workload balancing model particularly when such updates are frequent or
numerous. Attribute updates have implications for display modifications, while feature
updates are likely to mandate geometry changes. Introducing new products into an agency’s
product portfolio could mandate creation of new LoDs or additional anchor compilations,
creating major impacts on a workload balancing model. In fact, the framework we propose
here could be used to study new product feasibility, to justify staffing additions or addition
of new expertise into the labor pool. We do not discuss these implications in our present
work, but encourage others to address them and report on their experiences.

A third aspect which is not incorporated into the models, but should be, relates to the
workload associated with maintaining LoD versions of one or more data domains. It is
obvious that adding data layers will increase database management workloads, and in the
case of LoDs, the added data is slightly or wholly redundant, when it takes the form of
simplified versions of anchor data. The manager’s decision will have to balance work
required to establish unique identifiers, to link between multiple representations, and/or to
propagate changes consistently through a database. These additions to the overall workload
can be significant, changing not only the overall amount of work, but the shape of workload
curves, at or near the scales where LoDs are derived (Fig. 10).

These three gaps (automation, updates and LoD maintenance workloads) do not
diminish the utility of the workload balancing model described in this paper. Our work
provides a proof-of-concept for the proposal by Swiss cartographers to create Level of
Detail databases (LoDs) that contain subsets of data layers generalized to intermediate
scales. Researchers [9] propose use of a small number of LoDs to obviate the need for
computationally intensive scale-changing operations. In fact, the gaps underscore the need
to minimize the number of LoDs generated and maintained in any very large database. For
example, maintaining an additional one to three LoD feature versions inside a fully-
operational database (consisting perhaps of 15 to 20 feature layers within 10 to 12 data
domains) is trivial. The workload “cost” of updates and maintenance in this case is likely
far less than the cost of generating intermediate-scale versions on the fly. As the number of
LoDs increases, however, maintenance costs will begin to outweigh the benefits of pre-
computed versions. Project managers must balance these considerations as they decide
which strategy to adopt.

Our second case study and our draft LoD exercise demonstrates a further benefit of
LoDs, namely to extend the range of mapping scales which are accessible from a given
anchor resolution. Accessibility in this context refers to the range of scales within which a
given data set can be suitably symbolized to produce a readable map.

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

237

In the Ada County project, for example, we found that 1:5,000 hydrographic data could
be symbolized appropriately for mapping scales ranging from the anchor down to 1:20,000.
At smaller scales, hydrographic details began to coalesce and the maps lost graphic clarity;
these smaller scales were inaccessible from the anchor without applying some form of
geometry change (simplification, elimination, displacement, or aggregation). We produced
an LoD containing the data representation resulting from geometry changes. Substituting
the LoD for the 1:5,000 anchor hydrography, the map legibility improved. We found that
symbol change alone could support further scale reduction as well. We conclude that
production of an LoD for 1:20,000 extended the range of accessible scales for the Ada
County database.

Another benefit of creating LoDs is the reduction of expertise required to complete a
particular design at a particular mapping scale. By simplifying tasks required to generate a
smaller scale map, a project manager can reduce the level of cartographic expertise needed by
staff. A historical example of such expertise can be summarized by recalling that prior to the
advent of computer generated hillshading, many map production agencies employed one or a
few airbrushing experts who generated hillshades manually, often creating hillshade artwork
for areas much larger than any single map project might necessitate. Photographic negatives
of these were stored and cropped as necessary to suit individual maps. (Possibly this is a good
example of an analog LoD.) At present, development of refined algorithms has simplified
workloads to the point where the level of expertise required to produce a hillshade layer has
been reduced dramatically. Hillshades are commonly created using commercial off-the-shelf
software for each individual map product; and anyone on the cartographic staff can handle the
work with only a small amount of training.

We acknowledge that the creation of an LoD requires time, computer processing, and
cartographic skill, each of which is a factor in assessing workloads. It is important to keep
in mind that the point in producing the LoD is to expend those resources once, in order to
reduce workloads for subsequent mapping products. In the MRDB context, updates are then
automatically propagated to only the changed portions of LoDs as well as to anchor
databases at resolutions suited to smaller scale mapping. Obviously, it makes little sense to
create an LoD for a single map product. A project manager may consider outsourcing
or subcontracting data production tasks that exceed in-house time, processing, or skill
levels.

The workload balancing concept described in this paper has not been empirically
tested, with the exception of
findings from that exercise
the LoD exercise. Our
demonstrate that geometry change can reduce workloads for symbol change, and that
inserting LoDs at critical mapping scales can extend the usable range of a topographic
data base for mapping. Our research team does not handle the volume of mapping
projects needed to undertake a systematic empirical evaluation, although many small and
large mapping organizations do handle sufficient projects to do so. We encourage such an
effort and look forward to suggestions that could refine the workload balancing
framework which we propose.

Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge funding by ESRI (Professional Services Agree-
ments 2003B6345 and 2003B6346, 2003B6347, and 2006B2964). Charlie Frye and Aileen Buckley at ESRI
supported the project with planning, discussion, and data files. We also acknowledge database editing and
building by Kiyoshi Yamashita, a graduate research assistant at University of Colorado.

Open Access This article is distributed under
the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

the terms of

238

References

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

1. Anders K-H, Bobrich J (2004) MRDB approach for automatic incremental update. ICA Workshop on

Generalisation and Multiple Representation, Leister, UK, p 8

2. Balley S, Parent C, Spaccapietra S (2004) Modelling geographic data with multiple representations. Int J

Geogr Inf Sci 18(4):327–352. doi:10.1080/13658810410001672881

3. Brewer CA, Buttenfield BP (2007) Framing guidelines for multi-scale map design using databases at

multiple resolutions. Cartography Geogr Inf Sci 34(1):3–15. doi:10.1559/152304007780279078

4. Brewer CA, Buttenfield BP, Frye C, Acosta J (2007) Scalemaster: Multi-scale mapmaking from multiple
database resolutions and for multiple map purposes. 23rd International Cartographic Conference
(ICC2007), Moscow, Russia, p 10

5. Burghardt D, Neun M, Weibel R (2005) Generalization services on the web: classification and an initial
Inf Sci 32(4):257–268. doi:10.1559/

prototype implementation. Cartography Geogr
152304005775194665

6. Buttenfield BP, Frye C (2007) Rethinking best practices in cartographic data capture and modeling. 23rd

International Cartographic Conference (ICC2007), Moscow, Russia, p 10

7. Cecconi A, Galanda M (2002) Adaptive zooming in web cartography. Comput Graph Forum 21(4):787–

799. doi:10.1111/1467-8659.00636

8. Cecconi A, Weibel R, Barrault M (2002) Improving automated generalization for on-demand web
mapping by multiscale databases. Symposium on Geospatial Theory, Processing and Applications,
ISPRS/IGU/CIG, Ottawa, Canada, p 17

9. Cecconi A, Weibel R, Barrault M (2002) Improving automated generalization for on-demand mapping
by multiscale databases. In: Richardson D, van Oosterom P (eds) Advances in spatial data handling.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 515–532

10. Cecconi A (2003) Integration of cartographic generalization and multi-scale databases for enhanced web
mapping. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Zurich. http://www.
geo.uzh.ch/fileadmin/files/content/abteilungen/gis/research/phd_theses/thesis_AllessandroCecconi_2003.
pdf. Last accessed April 9, 2009

11. Gruenreich D (1995) Development of computer assisted generalizations on the basis of cartographic
model theory. In: Muller JC, Lagrange JP, Weibel R (eds) GIS and generalization: methodology and
practice. Taylor and Francis, London, pp 47–55

12. Hampe M, Sester M (2002) Real-time integration and generalization of spatial data for mobile

applications. Maps and the Internet 2002, Geowissenschaftliche Mitteilungen, Heft Nr.60, p 13

13. Joao E (1998) Causes and consequences of map generalisation. Taylor and Francis, London
14. Kilpelainen T (1997) Multiple representation and generalization of geo-databases for topographic maps.
Ph.D. Dissertation and Technical Publication of the Finnish Geodetic Institute No. 124, Helsinki
University of Technology, Finland

15. Neun M, Steiniger S (2005) Modelling cartographic relations for categorical maps. 22nd International

Cartographic Conference. A Coruña, Spain, p 11

16. Prasher S, Zhou X, Kitsuregawa M (2003) Dynamic multi-resolution spatial object derivation for mobile
and WWW applications. World Wide Web Internet Web Inf Syst 6:305–325. doi:10.1023/
A:1024605702887

17. Rigaux P, Scholl M, Voisard A (2002) Spatial databases with applications to GIS. San Francisco,

Morgan-Kaufmann

18. Sarjakoski LT (2007) Conceptual models of generalization and multiple representation. Chapter 2. In:
Mackaness WA, Ruas A, Sarjakoski LT (eds) Generalization of geographic information: Cartographic
modeling and applications. Elsevier, Amsterdam

19. Sarjakoski T, Sarjakoski LT (2007) A real-time generalisation and map adaptation approach for location-
based services. Chapter 7. In: Mackaness WA, Ruas A, Sarjakoski LT (eds) Generalization of geographic
information: Cartographic modeling and applications. Amsterdam, Elsevier

20. Sester M, Elias B (2007) Relevance of generalization to the extraction and communication of wayfinding
information. Chapter 10. In: Mackaness WA, Ruas A, Sarjakoski LT (eds) Generalization of geographic
information: Cartographic modeling and applications. Amsterdam, Elsevier

21. Spaccapietra S, Parent C, Vangenot C (2000) GIS databases: From multiscale to multirepresentation. In:

Choueiry BY, Walsh T (eds) SARA 2000, LNAI 1864. Springer-Verlag, pp 57–70

22. Stoter JE (2005) Generalisation within NMAs in the 21st Century. 22nd International Cartographic

Conference (ICC2005), A Coruña, Spain, p 11

23. Stoter JE, Kraak MJ, Knippers RA (2004) Generalization of framework data: A research agenda. ICA

Workshop on Generalisation and Multiple Representation, Leicester, UK, p 14

Geoinformatica (2010) 14:221–239

239

24. Thompson MM (1988) Maps for America: Cartographic Products of the U.S. Geological Survey and

Others. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington DC

25. Timpf S, Frank AU (1995) A multi-scale data structure for cartographic objects. 17th International

26. Torun A, Köbben B, Lemmens R (2000) Processing spatial data on the internet. Int Arch Photogramm

Cartographic Conference, Barcelona, Spain, p 8

Remote Sens 33(B6):269–278

27. Zhou X, Prasher S, Sun S, Xu K (2004) Multiresolution spatial databases: making web-based spatial

applications faster. Lect Notes Comput Sci 3007:36–47

Cynthia A. Brewer is a Professor in the Department of Geography at
the Pennsylvania State University. She has MA and PhD degrees in
Geography with emphasis in cartography from Michigan State
University. Her research interests are in map design, color theory
applications in cartography, multi-scale and multi-representation car-
tography, choropleth classification for maps in series, and atlas
mapping. Dr. Brewer has consulted for ESRI Inc., National Center
for Health Statistics, National Cancer Institute, U.S. Census Bureau, U.
S. Geological Survey, and National Park Service. She is the designer of
ColorBrewer.org, a Web tool for selecting map color schemes. Books
she has authored include Designed Maps: A Sourcebook for GIS Users,
Designing Better Maps: A Guide for GIS Users and Mapping Census
2000: The Geography of U.S. Diversity.

Barbara P. Buttenfield is Professor of Geography at the University of
Colorado in Boulder. She is Director of the Meridian Lab, a small
research facility focusing on visualization and modeling of geographic
information and technology. Her research focuses on map generaliza-
tion, multi-scale geospatial database design, algorithms for Web-based
data delivery, and visualization of uncertainty in environmental
modeling. She is a Past President of the Cartography and Geographic
Information Society (CaGIS), and a fellow of the American Congress
on Surveying and Mapping (ACSM). In 2001, she was named GIS
Educator of the Year by the University Consortium for Geographic
Information Science.

