Transactions in GIS, 2000, 4(1): 65–78

Research Article

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data
Archives

Sara I Fabrikant
Department of Geography, State University of New York-Buffalo

Abstract
Exponentially growing data archives emphasize the need for efficient techniques
and novel approaches to find and extract information. Information visualization
has emerged in the Information Retrieval domain to facilitate access to large
databases. This development acknowledges the need to focus on higher level
cognitive processes in information seeking. Graphic depictions of large databases
are increasingly based on the spatial metaphor. These representations are also
known as spatialized views or information spaces. Whereas space as a data
property has implications for the design and implementation of spatial information
systems, this paper explores whether commonly used spatial concepts could be
used as browsing metaphors to explore a digital library catalog. A proof of concept
is provided that illustrates how spatial metaphors might be embodied in a query
interface to visually explore the catalog of the Alexandria Digital Library. This
experimental interface includes an information landscape that is based on three
spatial concepts, distance (similarity), arrangement (dispersion and concentration),
and scale (level of detail).

1 Introduction

In the popular mythology the computer is a mathematics machine: it is designed to
do numerical calculations. Yet it is really a language machine: its fundamental
power lies in its ability to manipulate linguistic tokens – symbols to which meaning
has been assigned (Winograd 1984, 131).

The advent of computer networking technologies, such as the Internet and the World
Wide Web, has had a considerable impact on how we access, store, and exchange
information. Access to information is a key element to the economic, environmental

Address for correspondence: Sara I Fabrikant, Department of Geography, State University of
New York-Buffalo, Wilkeson Quad, Box 610023, Buffalo, NY 14261-0023, U.S.A. Email:
fabrikan@buffalo.edu

(cid:223) 2000 Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

66

Sara I Fabrikant

and social well being of a nation (National Research Council 1994). While the global
information infrastructure (GII) launched by Vice President Gore promises increasing
amounts of data available at our fingertips, the need for techniques and methods to
efficiently extract information becomes crucial (Gershon and Brown 1996a).

Although the computer has enabled ‘knowledge workers’ to process large amounts
of information, for example relying on efficient algorithms for searching, sorting and
indexing, as well as by reducing data retrieval times, the bottleneck in information
processing seems to lie in the user interface, restricting the potential of today’s
computational and communications technologies (Buxton 1990, 405). Unfortunately,
many of the current query user interfaces provide insufficient guidance for the
information seeker, and queries often return a huge set of undesired results (Doan et al
1996). Put more directly by Norman (1990, 210): ‘The real problem with the interface is
that it is an interface. Interfaces get in the way.’

Mark Weiser (1991, 94), who proposed ubiquitous computing points out that ‘The
arcane aura that surrounds personal computers is not just a user interface problem’,
but that ‘most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves
into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable.’ Weiser proposes that
such disappearance is not a fundamental consequence of technology, but of human
psychology. Moreover, to understand the invisibility of technology the humanities and
the social sciences are especially valuable, because they specialise in exposing the
otherwise invisible (Weiser 1994).

Traditional information retrieval is being superseded by interactive information
seeking strategies, based on powerful graphical direct manipulation user interfaces.
The term knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) (Fayyad et al 1996), for example,
encompasses strategies for finding useful patterns and extracting knowledge from
digital records stored in huge data archives, such as data warehouses. Knowledge
generation from large databases involves several steps, ranging from data manipulation
and retrieval, to mathematical and statistical inference, as well as search strategies and
human reasoning processes. A particular step in this knowledge discovery process
referred to as data mining, which refers to specific algorithms for extracting patterns
(models) from data sets (Fayyad et al 1996, 28). Other examples utilizing exploratory
information access techniques based on high resolution colour displays are data
browsing and filtering (Shneiderman 1998), or
information visualization and
information foraging (Robertson et al 1993, Pirolli and Card 1995).

2 Sense-making in Information Access

In the process of information use Gershon and Eick (1996) distinguish four phases:
information must be sifted and pertinent material must be found, accessed, and
understood. Moreover, information should be represented in a form that matches
human capabilities best (Gershon and Brown 1996b, 61). People’s interaction with a
large data archive will probably be more efficient if some sort of graphical display is
provided while they are searching for information. As graphical representations are
compelling and easy to understand, one can expect that a visual overview of the
information space will help people understand the content of the available data. A
visual approach is also desirable during query formulation. Instantaneous graphical
feedback helps users to understand the query process and to select appropriate query

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

67

terms. Likewise, a graphically oriented presentation of query results will help the
information seeker to ‘see’ results quickly and to successfully retrieve desired
documents. It has been shown that humans have powerful visual thinking abilities,
and physical, spatial and visual representations are easier to learn, understand and
communicate than abstract numeric or textual information (Arnheim 1969, Tufte 1983,
1990, 1997).

Utilizing sophisticated graphical imaging technology and relying on the concepts
taken from scientific visualization to ‘see the unseen’ (McCormick et al 1987),
information visualization has emerged in the human computer interaction domain to
facilitate information access to large distributed data archives (Robertson et al 1993,
Ahlberg and Shneiderman 1994).

Research on information visualization has produced novel data access tools to
cope with the fast growing demand to retrieve, store, manipulate, and understand large
amounts of data (Robertson et al 1993). Information foraging and sense-making
research have taken a cognitive, user centered approach to tackle the information
explosion. One of the main themes in sense-making is the process of searching for an
optimal representation and encoding data in that representation to answer task-specific
questions (Russell et al 1993, 269). Dervin (1983) suggests that information seeking and
use is central to sense-making, and that sense-making is both a cognitive internal
process as well as externalised overt behaviour. For example, making sense of a large
body of data by visual means is a crucial analysis task in any type of activity within an
information rich environment. Concepts taken from cognitive science and psychology
are combined with principles from human computer interaction, not only to design
better interactive information retrieval systems, but also to optimise the user’s cost of
operations in a general sense of information use (Russell et al 1993).

Information foraging specifically applies biological foraging strategies to the
processes of information gathering. Trade-offs in the value of information gained against
the costs of performing information-seeking tasks are analyzed and evaluated
(Robertson et al 1993, Pirolli and Card 1995). Russell et al (1993) have identified data
extraction as one of the most time consuming tasks in sense-making, and suggest
automated clustering techniques to lower the costs of information extraction within the
larger domain of information processing. Nelson (1990) suggests the term conceptual
structure design to represent the true structure and interconnectedness of information.
By using uniform or systematic spaces, such as geographic space for example,
multidimensional connections can be revealed. Discrete connectedness can be achieved
by mapping individual and disparate interconnections through hyperlinks (Nelson 1990).
Card (1996) suggests substituting the term ‘information perceptualization’ in place
of information visualization to imply a richer use of many senses (i.e. vision, sound and
touch) to increase the rate at which people can assimilate information. Information
perceptualization might be expanded into ‘information cognitization’ to emphasise the
internal, mental process of information use over the psychophysical aspects of seeing
an information representation.

3 Spatial Metaphors

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized views rely on the use of spatial metaphors to represent data that are not
necessarily spatial. Spatial metaphors constitute a fundamental part of human

68

Sara I Fabrikant

image

schemata which structure

cognition (Lakoff 1987). Lakoff (1987) defines the Spatialization of Form Hypothesis,
which requires a metaphorical mapping from physical space into a conceptual space.
space are mapped into the
Consequently,
corresponding abstract configurations, which structure concepts (Lakoff 1987). The
way books are shelved in a library could serve as an example. For instance, the
fundamental near-far image schemata (Johnson 1987, 126) can be used as a source
domain and mapped into the abstract target domain of similarity. Typically, a library
user looking for plays by Shakespeare will find the items of interest in the English
Literature section, where other books by English authors and or English plays will be
placed on nearby shelves.

The user’s understanding of

spatialization is based on envisioning and
comprehending spatial properties. Among the most basic properties of space are
location, distance and direction. Golledge (1995) discusses a set of primitives for
building those spatial concepts, such as identity,
location, magnitude, and time.
Distance, angle and direction, connection and linkage (nearest neighbor, proximity,
similarity, etc) can be derived from the basic concept location. Derived concepts can be
combined to build higher order
spatial concepts. Location, magnitude, and
connectivity can be combined to obtain the concept of hierarchy, for instance. An
ordered tree (hierarchy) provides a useful metaphor or data model for the concept of
scale. Similarly, (local) density, which is connected to the concept of dispersion, may be
constructed by combining location with magnitude.

Both Lakoff and Johnson (1980) and Lakoff (1987) point out that spatial schemata
seem to be at the core of cognitive structures and form a basis for many less concrete
domains. ‘Spatialization metaphors are rooted in physical and cultural experiences’,
and ‘much of how we think in later life is based on what we learn in early life about the
world of space’ (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, 17–8). These linguistic definitions of
spatialization exemplify why spatial metaphors may play an important role in the
human-computer interaction domain and more specifically within user interface
design. Spatialization serves the user’s need to organise abstract concepts coherently
(i.e. a computer operating system) and to ground them in familiar experiences (i.e. an
office desk) (Kuhn and Blumenthal 1996, 57). A metaphor’s primary function is to
provide a partial understanding of one kind of experience in terms of another kind of
experience (Lakoff and Johnson 1980). Consequently, because spatial experience is so
fundamental to humans, spatial metaphors act as fundamental sense makers for
abstract domains.

As space plays such an important role in human cognition, spatialization might
profoundly influence the quality of the design of interactive information access user
interfaces. Lastly, spatial metaphors suggest a rich source for affordances (Kuhn and
Blumenthal 1996). Gibson (1979) coined the term affordances to describe values and
meanings of objects which humans can perceive while they interact with them in
everyday life. In other words, affordances are properties of things taken with reference
to an observer, but not of the experiences of the observer (Gibson 1979, 137; italics in
original). For example solid substances have perceivable surfaces, with individual
characteristics. If the surface is flat and extended, it affords support. According to
Gibson, the ground literally ‘affords’ the base support for human behaviour in space
and perception thereof.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

69

4 Information Access using Spatial Metaphors

The World Wide Web is a good example of how spatial metaphors are used. For
example, Web surfers navigate from site to site on the infobahn to explore cyberspace.
Information seekers search the infosphere for information and access it through the
docusphere or the docuverse.

The graphical user interface of a query system could also be seen as an interaction
‘space’ affording an information seeker the opportunity to interact with objects on the
display in order to find information. Norman (1988) utilises the concept of affordances,
to study the effectiveness of design of everyday things, such as doors, light switches,
VCRs, etc. Gibson’s (1979) and Norman’s (1988) affordance concepts can be
transferred into the human computer interaction domain, to enhance the effectiveness
of graphical user interfaces. Prototypical interactions of an information gatherer with a
query system are formalised in Table 1, using Shneiderman’s (1998, 510–3) task action
taxonomy, within an object-action interface framework.

Task-centered user interface design (Lewis and Rieman 1994) emphasises the
identification of representative information access tasks an information seeker wishes
to perform while accessing a large data repository, for example the Alexandria Digital
Library (ADL, on the Web at http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu). There are two ways to
query the ADL in the current interface. First, specific keywords can be entered in text
entry fields to issue a combined search in the gazetteer (geographic search) and the
catalog (attribute search). Second, one can use the map browser to graphically refine
the search area, by zoom and pan. Relating to Sheiderman’s task action taxonomy (see
Table 1), only known-item-searches are available, thus restricting a user to specific
keywords or geographic areas as query inputs.

Although the system handles specific fact finding well, exploratory information
access through open-ended browsing is not adequately supported. Some users might
not have a well-defined information need, and might desire to gain an overview of the
entire collection first, before querying it with a specific keyword. Other information
seekers might be interested in discovering new relationships among items of interest in
the database, which would assists them in formulating queries they would not have
previously considered.

What might a visual information gathering process look like in ADL? Exploratory
information seeking could be built upon what Shneiderman (1998, 523) calls the visual-
information-seeking mantra. The mantra includes three parts: ‘Overview first, zoom
and filter, then details-on-demand’. Users can directly manipulate visual components
provided in the interface, to refine a query. Dynamic queries are carried out by ‘point
and click’ as well as ‘drag and drop’, using tools and buttons, sliders, scroll bars and
check boxes. Linked windows allow an immediate graphical response by the system.
The general interaction schema in Figure 1 outlines how information seekers might be
able to interact with ADL’s collection.

5 Spatialization

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialization, which combines powerful visualization techniques with spatial
metaphors, has a great potential to overcome current impediments in information
access and retrieval. Spatialization is utilised to create lower-dimensional digital

70

Sara I Fabrikant

Table 1

Information Access Tasks in a Digital Library (after Shneiderman 1998)

User

Interface

tasks actions

representative tasks

objects

affordances

Specific fact
finding

Find a USGS digital
orthophoto quad of
Boulder, CO

point and click, type,
select, scroll, use slider,
check mark

Extended fact
finding

Are there
orthophoto quad
series available in
CO to study
landuse change
along the South
Platte River?

Open-ended
browsing

Hikes to 14-ers in
Coloraodo?

Exploration
of availability

What types of
maps of Boulder,
CO are available?

resizable windows,
data entry fields,
menus, selection lists,
scroll bars, buttons,
check-boxes

linked windows, visual
and textual query
tools, i.e. information
spaces, dynamic
graphs, keyword trees,
sliders, graphic
footprints

drag and drop, select,
compare and match,
scroll, use slider, link,
jump, animate, graphic
Boolean queries, zoom-ins,
lasso, transect

linked windows, visual
and textual query
tools, i.e. information
spaces, dynamic
graphs, keyword trees,
sliders

drag and drop, select,
compare and match,
scroll, use slider, link,
jump, animate, graphic
Boolean queries, zoom-ins,
lasso, transect

drag and drop, select,
compare and match,
scroll, use slider, link,
jump, animate, graphic
Boolean queries, zoom-ins,
lasso, transect

linked windows, visual
and textual overview
of available items
according to selected
keywords, i.e.
information spaces at
multiple scales,
keyword tree lists,
dynamic graphs,
sliders, graphic
footprints.

representations of higher-dimensional data sets, whose characteristics are often quite
in nature. Common spatial
complex. These digital data sets may not be spatial
concepts such as distance, direction, scale and arrangement which are part of the
human’s experience in everyday life are applied, to construct abstract information
spaces. Spatialization offers the field of geography, which investigates space and spatial
relations, opportunities to apply the body of knowledge to other non-spatial domains.
Egenhofer and Mark (1995, 4) coined the term Naive Geography to describe ‘[. . .]
the body of knowledge that people have about the surrounding geographic world.’
They argue that spatio-temporal reasoning is so common in people’s daily life that it is

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

71

Figure 1 Visual Browsing Query Process (Fabrikant and Buttenfield 1997, 688).

rarely noticed as a particular concept of spatial analysis. Naive Geography, in their
words, focuses on formal models of common-sense knowledge of geographic spaces
(Egenhofer and Mark 1995, 3).

Why is

the geographic

spatialization important

information science
for
community? As geographers, cartographers and GIS users, we are familiar with the
use of spatial metaphors. Relying on sound graphic design principles from a long
standing cartographic tradition and spatial modeling concepts developed within
analytical geography, the GIS community has a strong background to offer, in helping
to design these new representations for non-spatial data. The reduction of real world
complexity through cognitive processes like selection, abstraction and generalization is
a key process in spatial data handling, to extract and communicate meaning about the
multidimensional world. Moreover, there still seems to be little formalised knowledge
on how humans develop concepts and reason about geographical space. Geographic
Information Systems, being a special case of information systems, deal explicitly with
the representation of space. However, Medyckyi-Scott and Blades (1992) point out,
that the increased sophistication of GIS has not always been accompanied by an
improvement of usability. Unfortunately, the user has to learn an abstract formalised
spatial language, and adapt to the system’s terms of representing space, instead of the
system reflecting how the users themselves represent and reason about space. This is a
fundamental impediment from the perspective of usability.

Exploring the use of familiar spatial metaphors to represent large, non-spatial data
sets for information access might help the geographic information science community
to learn more about human spatial reasoning and decision-making. Consideration of
spatial cognition is not only important for the development of spatial information

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

72

Sara I Fabrikant

theory, but also the focus on the user’s view of space will play a significant role in the
design of more intuitively usable geographic information systems.

Successful spatialization examples demonstrate that graphical displays based on
spatial properties can reveal patterns and structures within the data base. For example,
Chalmers (1993) creates a landscape of conference proceedings articles, which are
organised spatially, depending on their similarity in content. Skupin and Buttenfield
(1996, 1997) construct a ‘newspaper article space’ representing the thematic content of
news articles in two issues of the New York Times. Atkins (1995) describes the periodic
table of the elements as a geographic landscape. Based on element characteristics,
Atkins divides the chemical elements into landscape regions. Subsequently, he creates a
terrain of the chemical elements in terms of altitudes that represent different element
features or characteristics such as atomic masses, diameters, or densities.

Spatialized user interfaces emerged over the past few years, first popularised by
spatialized operating systems (i.e. Apple Macintosh’s Finder) and then spreading into
virtual environments, multimedia applications and computer game worlds (Kuhn and
Blumenthal 1996). User interfaces based on spatial metaphors also found their way into
the information visualization domain, for example Wise et al (1995) implemented
Themescape, an information retrieval
interface depicting surfaces of document
collections, organised spatially by similarity of term co-occurrences (see Fabrikant
(1999)
for more examples described in related work to represent abstract,
multidimensional databases with spatial metaphors). Although awareness of the
potential benefits of spatialization is growing, there seems to be a lack of systematic
treatment (Kuhn and Blumenthal 1996, Skupin and Buttenfield 1996).

The use of spatialization is not restricted to the larger domain of information use,
but touches on a wide variety of human related activities, including cognitive, aesthetic,
social, legal, educational, as well as commercial aspects (Kuhn and Blumenthal 1996,
3). Whereas aesthetic aspects focus on aesthetically pleasing and comprehensible
designs for the visualization of space, social and educational components are centered
around the user community using spatialized displays. At a higher societal level, legal
if access and security issues are involved in the general
aspects become crucial,
information use domain. This paper
focuses mainly on cognitive aspects of
spatialization (and to a small extent on aesthetic issues), and how they may relate to
widely used concepts and techniques in geography and cartography, to comprehend
large bodies of non-spatial data by visual means.

6 Spatialized Browsing

This section describes a proof-of-concept of an experimental query interface to visually
browse the data type catalog of the ADL. The design of this direct manipulation
interface is based on three spatial concepts, including distance (similarity), scale (level
of detail), and arrangement (dispersion and concentration).

As noted in an earlier section, Lakoff (1987) defines metaphors as mappings from a
source to a target domain, or in other words metaphors allow us to partially
understand one thing in terms of another (Kuhn and Blumenthal 1996, 16). Moreover,
spatial metaphors include affordances. Affordances call for opportunities of interaction
between a human and entities populating an environment (Gibson 1979, Norman 1988,
Kuhn and Blumenthal 1996). Table 2 lists relevant spatial image schemata extracted

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

73

Table 2

Spatial Image Schemata and Cognitive User Tasks

Spatial Image
Schemata

Source Domain
(library collection)

Target Domain
(collection landscape)

Cognitive User Tasks
(spatial abilities)

Container

data archive

landscape of documents

Link

cross references
between items

cross sections in
landscape

Near-Far

similarity between
items

distance between items

Surface

library collection

landscape of keywords

recognise and associate
regions to items in the
collection

associate and relate items
of interest by similarity in
content

estimate distance between
documents, based on
content similarity

recognise and associate
landscape features to
structure of documents

Scale

hierarchy of
documents

level of detail in
landscape

organise and rank
documents

Part-Whole

clusters of related
documents

regions in landscape

differentiate, recognise,
and detect regions of
related documents.

from Johnson’s (1987, 126) image schemata taxonomy, which form basic structures
based on our everyday experiences interacting with the environment and relate them to
cognitive user tasks in the information access process.

7 Representations of Spatial Metaphors in a Query

Applying spatial metaphors to the visual-information-seeking mantra discussed earlier
a spatialized information gathering session in ADL could be envisioned as follows. An
information seeker will encounter a direct manipulation interface with linked windows
(Figure 2). Dynamic queries are carried out by buttons, sliders and check boxes, which
trigger an immediate graphical response by the system. Items selected in the lists will be
highlighted in the spatialized views and vice-versa.

To envision the distance concept, for instance, a series of spatial metaphors might
be possible, spanning from the abstract to the concrete, such as point clouds, bar
graphs, spaces, pin-point maps, block diagrams, stepped surfaces, continuous surfaces,
etc. Also mimetic representations could be utilized, such as a city metaphor with
skyscrapers and connecting streets, a transportation network with stations and paths,
or perhaps a library metaphor with rooms, shelves and documents. The scale metaphor
could be envisioned as different types of hierarchical trees, hierarchical networks,
dendograms or color-coded layers.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

74

Sara I Fabrikant

Figure 2
689).

Spatialized Query User Interface (modified from Fabrikant and Buttenfield 1997,

Figure 2 presents a landscape of keywords representing ADL’s data type catalog
index. The distance metaphor is applied to keywords describing documents in the
archive, relying on Salton’s (1989) vector space model. Multidimensional scaling
(MDS) is utilised as the projection method to create a surface of keywords (Skupin and
Buttenfield 1997). The landscape of catalog items that were returned by a query is
visualised in Figure 2, in the centre window. In this abstract data space the physical
distance concept (source domain) is mapped into the abstract document similarity
concept (target domain). Documents characterised by similar keyword sets are placed
closer together in the landscape than documents which have few keywords in common.
This landscape affords a user to:

• look at the surface and get a sense of the structure of the library space (overview

first)

• navigate in this landscape to discover items of interest
• selectively perceive the landscape by changing the level of detail of the document

space (zoom and filter)

• select individual documents or groups of documents
• discover relationships between documents (details-on-demand).

Several components of the interface are provided to envision the level of detail of
the data base. For example, tools for zooms are available and a window visualises the
hierarchical structure of the keywords. Direct manipulation of the spatialized views
follows previous work demonstrating ease of learning interface tools (Shneiderman

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

75

1983, Tsou and Buttenfield 1996). For example an information seeker might be
interested in the availability of aerial orthophotographs of Boulder, Colorado. While
selecting the data type keywords ‘cartographic material’ and ‘aerial photograph’ in
either the Hierarchy Tree Window or the Keyword List Window their place in the data
space and the magnitude of documents associated with the selected keywords will be
displayed dynamically in the landscape window.

The information foraging principle is included as well, which refers to the optimal
use of knowledge about the expected information value and about the expected costs of
accessing and extracting the relevant information (Pirolli and Card 1995). For example,
a window is provided which reacts to keyword selections by displaying dynamic bars
showing the relative percentage of hits that would be associated with each keyword.
This graphic display supports people in their query refinement and indicates the
magnitude of results to expect.

The Cross Section Window combines the scale with the distance and direction
metaphors. The gray area under the curve predicts the magnitude of related documents
to be expected along the transect line drawn in white across the landscape window.
The transect is determined by a source and target keyword (white and dark gray
square). By moving the slider below the x-axis of the Cross Section Window, the
location of keywords along the transect line in the landscape window will be
highlighted.

The ‘collection surface’ embodies the concept of arrangement. Peaks and valleys of
documents offer a graphic overview of the queried items. As users dynamically select
keywords in a Keywords List Window, the Landscape Window reveals their position
within the collection, in relation to each other, based on their content. The ‘looking
glass’ tool allows a user to examine the surface in more detail. The ‘three-by-three
pixel’ window at the lower left corner of the landscape window displays the exact
number of hits retrieved at the mouse location (black arrow in Figure 2).

8 Conclusions and Future Work

Cognitive, user centered approaches are increasingly used in Information Retrieval to
tackle the information explosion. Information visualization has emerged within the
human-computer interaction field to facilitate access to fast growing, complex data
archives by combining cognitive approaches with graphical
imaging technology.
Graphic representations of vast databases are increasingly based on spatial metaphors.
Spatial concepts are viewed as a useful metaphor to graphically depict large complex
databases because concepts about space are easily accessible to human cognition. This
article explored whether spatial concepts could be utilized as browsing metaphors to
make better sense of the contents of a large digital data archive. Grounded in cognitive
theory on space and spatial metaphors, a proof-of-concept for a direct manipulation
interface has been described that relies on a set of spatial primitives to envision the
catalog of a digital library such as the Alexandria Project. Basic spatial concepts such as
distance (similarity), arrangement (dispersion and concentration), and scale (level of
detail) are applied to create a landscape of keywords of a hierarchical library catalog.
The use of spatialized views to represent the holdings of a digital library has not been
implemented to date. As argued in this paper, spatialized views to represent the catalog
of a digital library would help people to browse large document collections.

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

76

Sara I Fabrikant

Further research could include several steps. Firstly, spatial concepts embedded in
the mock-up interface should be tested with users to provide empirical evidence on the
the described metaphors for visualization. Users’ metaphor
appropriateness of
comprehension might not only vary depending on the information need, but also
depending on the types of documents available in the collection. Usability evaluation
should include query scenarios based on representative information seeking tasks and
the information landscape can be tested
real-world data. Multiple versions of
depending on the organisation principle applied to store the data. Information spaces
can be constructed that depict the temporal structure of items in the archive (e.g.
acquisition date, lending date, etc), their geographical location (e.g. storage location,
their administrative status (e.g.
geographic descriptions within documents, etc),
document type, availability, popularity, etc) or their semantic content (e.g. depending
on type of subject index).

Secondly,

insights gained through usability evaluation should lead to system
implementation, using an existing library collection that is based on a real document
catalog. A host of design challenges need to be addressed that lie beyond the scope of
this paper. For example, real time visualizations of dynamic online databases, direct
manipulation interfaces that allow instantaneous query feedback from distributed
databases, or the application of spatial metaphors in virtual, immersive environments.
Technological challenges will have to be considered as well. Issues, such as data base
scalability, data access, update and maintenance aspects in a distributed environment
(e.g. Internet), and efficient data retrieval algorithms (e.g. precision and recall) beg for
an increased, collaborative research effort across disciplines.

Acknowledgements

This paper forms a portion of the Alexandria Digital Library Project, jointly sponsored
by NSF, NASA, and ARPA. Funding by the National Science Foundation (NSF IRI-94-
11330) is greatly appreciated. Matching funds from the University of Colorado are also
acknowledged. I would also like to thank Dr Barbara P Buttenfield for critical
comments on earlier drafts. The input of anonymous reviewers has also helped to
strengthen the ideas presented in this paper.

References

Ahlberg C and Shneiderman B 1994 Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query
filters with Starfield displays. In: Proceedings, CHI’94, Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, April 24–28, 1994. Boston, MA: 313–21

Arnheim R 1969 Visual Thinking. Berkeley, CA, University of California Press
Atkins P W 1995 The Periodic Kingdom. New York, NY, Basic Books
Buxton B 1990 The natural language of interaction: A perspective on nonverbal dialogues. In
Laurel B (ed) The Art of Human-Computer Interface Design. Reading, MA, Addison-
Wesley: 405–16

Card S K 1996 Visualizing retrieved information: A survey. IEEE Computer Graphics and

Applications 70: 63–7

Chalmers M 1993 Using a landscape metaphor to represent a corpus of documents. In: Frank A U
and Campari I (ed) Spatial Information Theory. A Theoretical Basis for GIS. Berlin,
Springer: 377–90

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

Spatialized Browsing in Large Data Archives

77

Dervin B 1983 An overview of sense-making research: Concepts, methods, and results to date.
Unpublished Paper presented at the International Communication Association Annual
Meeting, May, 1983 (Dallas, TX)

Doan K Plaisant C, and Shneiderman B 1996 Query previews in networked information systems.
In: Proceedings, ADL ’96, Forum on Research and Technology Advances in Digital
Libraries, May 1996. Washington DC: 120–9

Egenhofer M J and Mark D M 1995 Naive Geography. In: Frank A U and Kuhn W (ed) Spatial
Information Theory. A Theoretical Basis for GIS (COSIT 1995). Berlin, Springer: 1–15
Fabrikant S I and Buttenfield B P 1997 Envisioning user access to a large data archive. In:

Proceedings, GIS/LIS ’97, Oct. 28–30, 1997. Cincinnati, OH: 686–92

Fabrikant S I 1999 Spatial Metaphors for Browsing Large Data Archives. Unpublished PhD

Dissertation, University of Colorado-Boulder

Fayyad U, Piatetsky-Shapiro G, and Smyth P 1996 The KDD process for extracting useful

knowldedge from volumes of data. Communications of the ACM 39: 27–34

Gershon N and Brown J R 1996a Computer graphics and visualization in the global information

infrastructure. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 70: 60–1

Gershon N and Brown J R 1996b The role of computer graphics and visualization in the GII.

IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 70: 61–3

Gershon N and Eick S G 1996 Visualization’s new tack: Making sense of information. IEEE

Spectrum 32: 38–56

Gibson J J 1979 The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston, MA, Houghton Miflin
Golledge R G 1995 Primitives of spatial knowledge. In: Nyerges, T L, Mark, D M, Laurini R, and
Egenhofer M J (ed) Cognitive Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction for Geographic
Information Systems. Dordrecht, Kluwer: 29–44

Johnson M 1987 The Body in the Mind: Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and Reason.

Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press

Kuhn W and Blumenthal B 1996 Spatialization: Spatial Metaphors for User Interfaces. Vienna,

Department of Geoinformation, Technical University of Vienna

Lakoff G 1987 Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal About The Mind.

Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press

Lakoff G and Johnson M 1980 Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press
Lewis C and Rieman J 1994 Task-centered user interface design: A practical instruction. WWW

document, ftp://ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/distribs/clewis/HCI-Design-Book/

McCormick B H, DeFanti T A, and Brown M D 1987 Visualization in scientific computing.

ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics Newsletter No 21(6)

Medyckyi-Scott D and Blades M 1992 Human spatial cognition: Its relevance to the design and

use of spatial information systems. Geoforum 23: 215–26

National Research Council 1994 Promoting the National Spatial Data Infrastructure through

Partnerships. Washington, DC, National Academic Press

Nelson T H 1990 The right way to think about software design. In: Laurel B (ed) The Art of

Human-Computer Interface Design. Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley: 235–43
Norman D 1988 The Psychology of Everyday Things. New York, NY, Basic Books
Norman D A 1990 Why interfaces don’t work. In: Laurel B (ed) The Art of Human-Computer

Interface Design. Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley: 209–24

Pirolli P and Card S 1995 Information foraging in information access environments. WWW
document, http://www.acm.org/sigchi/chi95/Electronic/documnts/papers/ppp_bdy.htm
Robertson G G, Card S K, and Mackinlay J D 1993 Information visualization using 3D

interactive animation. Communications of the ACM 36: 57–71

Russell D M, Stefik M J, Pirolli P, and Card S K 1993 The cost structure of sensemaking. In:
Proceedings, INTERCHI ’93, Human Factors in Computing Systems, April, 24-29, 1995.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 269–76

Salton G 1989 Automatic Text Processing. The Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of

Information by Computer. Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley

Shneiderman B 1983 Direct manipulation: A step beyond programming languages. IEEE

Computer 16: 57–69

Shneiderman B 1998 Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer

Interaction. Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

78

Sara I Fabrikant

Skupin A and Buttenfield B P 1996 Spatial metaphors for visualizing very large data archives. In:

Proceedings, GIS/LIS ’96, November 19–21, 1996. Denver, CO: 607–17

Skupin A and Buttenfield B P 1997 Spatial metaphors for display of information spaces. In:

Proceedings, AUTO-CARTO 13, April 7–10, 1997. Seattle, WA: 116–25

Tsou M and Buttenfield B P 1996 A direct manipulation interface for geographic information
processing. In: Proceedings, Seventh International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling,
August 12–16, 1996. Delft, The Netherlands: 37–47

Tufte E 1983 The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press
Tufte E 1990 Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press
Tufte E 1997 Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire,

CT, Graphics Press

Weiser M 1991 The computer for the twenty-first century. Scientific American 265: 94–110
Weiser M 1994 The world is not a desktop. Interactions of the ACM 1: 7–8
Winograd T 1984 Computer software for working with language. Scientific American 251: 31–45
Wise J A, Thomas J J, Pennock K A, Lantrip D B, Pottier M, Schur A, and Crow V 1995
Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information from text
documents. In: Proceedings, IEEE Information Visualization ’95, October 30–31, 1995.
Atlanta, GA: 51–8

(cid:223) Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2000

