 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4): 541–561

XXX 
© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1467-9671
1361-1682
TGISTransactions in GIS
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK

Research Article

Research Article
Choice Modeler
P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

Choice Modeler: A Web-based Spatial 
Multiple Criteria Evaluation Tool

Piotr Jankowski
Department of Geography
San Diego State University

Martin Swobodzinski
Department of Geography
San Diego State University

Arika-Ligmann Zielinska
Department of Geography
San Diego State University

Abstract
This  article  presents  a  concept  of  a  Web-based  spatial  multiple  criteria  evaluation
tool for individual and group use called Choice Modeler (CM). CM was originally
conceived  as  part  of  a  larger  Participatory  Geographic  Information  System  for
Transportation  project  (PGIST;  http://www.pgist.org)  aimed  at  developing  and
evaluating  Internet-hosted  capabilities  to  support  participatory  decision  processes.
CM is designed to be either a part of a larger information system such as PGIST or
a  standalone  tool  used  for  evaluation  of  decision  variants.  The  decision  support
functions provided by CM aid in reducing the cognitive complexity of the decision
space  characterized  by  multiple  decision  options,  evaluation  criteria,  and  criterion
weights. This is achieved by incorporating in CM the sensitivity analysis functions
for  the  identification  of  criteria  that  do  not  influence  the  decision  option  ranking.
Users  can  remove  such  criteria  from  further  consideration  and  thus  lessen  the
cognitive  burden  of  evaluation,  which  may  be  essential  in  multi-stakeholder
participatory  decision  processes.  The  additional  capabilities  of  CM  include  a  vote
aggregation function to collate individual option rankings into a group ranking, and
measures  of  agreement/disagreement  to  inform  the  participants  about  a  group-
derived desirability of specific decision options. The design of CM was implemented
using  Web-service  architecture.  In  the  article  we  describe  the  design  of  CM  and
discuss its advantages and limitations.

: Multiple Criteria Evaluation, Web-service architectures, Spatial Decision Support Systems, GIS, Sensitivity Analysis
Keywords

Address for correspondence: 
San Diego, CA 92182-4493, USA. E-mail: piotr@geography.sdsu.edu

Piotr Jankowski, Department of Geography, San Diego State University,

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2008.01111.x

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

1 Introduction

542

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

Multiple criteria evaluation (MCE) is a fundamental approach for screening and selecting
spatially  differentiated  decision  variants  (Voogd  1983,  Beinat  and  Nijkamp  1998).  In
the last fifteen years, much work has been directed toward integrating Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and multiple criteria evaluation (MCE) methods in the context of spatial
decision  support  systems  for  planning,  retail  and  services  locations,  land-based  project
selection,  and  environmental  management  (Carver  1991,  Eastman  et  al.  1993,  Pereira
and Duckstein 1993, Jankowski 1995, Laaribi et al. 1996, Tkach and Simonovic 1997,
Malczewski  1999,  Joerin  et  al.  2001,  Gomes  and  Lins  2002,  Marinoni  2005).  The
concept of Spatial Decision Dupport Systems (SDSS), introduced in Geography 20 years
ago (Cowen 1988, Densham and Rushton 1988, Densham and Goodchild 1989, Armstrong
et al. 1991), was inspired by earlier work in management science on systems and tools
augmenting  human  expert  knowledge  with  data  management,  modeling,  display,  and
reporting  functions  in  order  to  support  managerial  decisions  (Keen  and  Scott-Morton
1978,  Sprague  and  Carlson  1982).  The  motivation  for  research  on  SDSS  came  largely
from recognizing that there was a class of spatial decision problems characterized by the
lack  of  structure  involving  an  incomplete  knowledge  of  decision  objectives,  evaluation
criteria,  decision  options,  and  consequences/impacts  of  those  options.  Such  problems
often  cut  across  various  domains,  organizational  boundaries,  individual,  and  group
interests. In this context, MCE can be useful only after the basic structure for a decision
problem, involving decision options, evaluation criteria, and the performance of decision
options on the criteria, has been established. Nevertheless, over the last 20 years spatial
MCE has come to be recognized as an inextricable component of SDSS (Malczewski 2006).
The decision processes aimed at resolving complex land and other resource allocation
problems frequently involve multiple actors such as domain experts, managers, elected
officials, and representatives of various civic groups. The recognition of the complexities
accompanying  spatially-explicit  decision  problems  motivated  the  work  on  SDSS  that
provided spatial decision support capabilities for groups (Armstrong 1993, Faber et al.
1994).  Much  of  that  research  was  focused  on  combining  the  development  of  group
work techniques using maps, computational models, and collaborative modes of work,
eventually  leading  to  the  development  of  what  is  known  today  as  geocollaboration
(MacEachren 2004, MacEachren and Brewer 2004). Within that context appeared the
early  prototypes  of  SDSS  tools  involving  MCE  functions  modified  for  group  work
(Malczewski 1996, Jankowski et al. 1997, Jankowski and Stasik 1997). The majority of
early  implementations  of  SDSS  incorporating  MCE  functions  were  developed  for  the
monolithic  desktop  computer  systems  using  one  of  three  strategies  including  loose
coupling, tight coupling, and full integration (Malczewski 2006). With the development
of Internet GIS (Peng and Tsou 2003), interoperability standards (OGC 2008) and Web-
based  technologies  (Berners-Lee  et  al.  2001)  research  on  SDSS  in  the  late  1990s  and
early 2000s started to employ the distributed (client-server) architectures (Carver et al.
1998,  Kingston  et  al.  2000,  Zhu  et  al.  2001,  Jankowski  et  al.  2001,  Andrienko  and
Andrienko 2001, Rinner and Malczewski 2002). Rinner (2003), in his overview of a Web-
based SDSS, distinguished three categories of SDSS based on: (1) sever-side applications; (2)
client-side  applications;  and  (3)  mixed  architectures  taking  advantage  of  both  server-
resident and client-resident decision support capabilities.

This  classification  of  Web-based  SDSS  architectures  is  instrumental  for  situating
Choice Modeler (CM) as a server-based MCE tool. The adoption of advances in Web-based

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Choice Modeler

543

technologies for MCE has been rather slow. The objective of this article is to contribute
to the advancement of MCE as a stand alone methodology and a potential SDSS com-
ponent by presenting a design and prototype implementation utilizing the current Web-
based technologies. In the remainder of the article we provide a brief overview of recent
work  on  Web-based  SDSS  with  a  focus  on  explicit  MCE  capabilities.  This  is  followed
by the presentation of MCE functions implemented in CM and by the discussion of its
architecture.  The  article  closes  with  an  outlook  on  future  directions  in  developing  dis-
tributed MCE capabilities.

2 Web-based Spatial Decision Support Systems and Multiple 
Criteria Evaluation

There is a notable body of recent work on Web-based spatial decision support systems
(Web-SDSS) developed in various application domains such as watershed management
(Dymond et al. 2004; Choi et al. 2005a, b), public housing management (Burton et al.
2005),  business  allocation  (Jung  and  Sun  2006),  landslide  risk  assessment  (Yu  et  al.
2006),  flood forecasting (Wang and Cheng 2007), prediction of marine mammal habitats
(Best  et  al.  2007),  negotiation  support  (Chen  et  al.  2008),  and  collaborative  planning
(Stock et al. 2008). In much of the work cited here spatial decision support capabilities
include application-specific models for the simulation of various what-if scenarios, and
tools  that  enable  the  visualization  of  the  simulation  results.  Conspicuously  missing  in
those  systems  are  functions  and  tools  enabling  the  amplification  of  human  judgment
about  the  components  of  the  decision  situation  (decision  options,  evaluation  criteria,
option  and  criterion  preferences),  and  the  support  for  group  decision  processes.  In  the
absence of MCE functions, an exploratory visual analysis becomes the primary vehicle
for supporting the evaluation of simulated decision scenarios.

Within  the  last  six  years  only  a  small  number  of  contributions  reported  on  Web-
SDSS developments that explicitly include MCE and group work functions. Rinner and
Malczewski  (2002)  implemented  an  MCE  method  called  ordered  weighted  averaging
(OWA)  in  an  Internet-based  interactive  mapping  environment  based  on  the  Common-
GIS system (Andrienko and Andrienko 1999). The OWA function was implemented
as  Java  classes  built  into  the  client-side  Java  applet  comprising  the  CommonGIS.
Andrienko et al. (2003) extended their Java applet-based CommonGIS system, developed
as a client-side Java applet, by adding sensitivity analysis capabilities to test the influence
of shifting criterion weights on the stability of decision option ranking. They also added
vote calculation functions to compute the outcome of ranked vote and the vote variance.
Bernard  et  al.  (2003)  developed  a  prototype  of  a  Web-based  MCE  tool  using  the
concept  of  a  Web  service.  Building  on  the  recommendations  and  specifications
of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for distributed Web-services, they discussed
the design considerations for a Web-based MCE tool that aids in the selection of areas of
substantial  vulnerability  to  climate  change.  The  authors  proposed  two  approaches  for
implementing  a  MCE  Web  service  within  a  chain  of  OGC-compliant  Web  services
including Web Map Server (WMS), Web Coverage Service (WCS), Web Feature Service
(WFS), and Web Catalogue Service (OGC 2008). In the first approach, the ‘thick’ client
establishes a transparent chain between the Web services, and then retrieves and processes
the necessary data directly through the standardized interfaces of the Web services. All
MCE related functions (i.e. the definition of criteria, the assignment of weights to criteria,

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

544

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

the  normalization  of  criteria  values,  and  the  calculation  of  decision  option  scores)  are
handled  by  the  ‘thick’  client.  The  second  approach  employs  one  Web  service  that
aggregates all MCE-relevant functions. In this approach all the functionality is handled
on  the  server-side;  the  ‘thin’  client  acts  merely  as  the  user  interface  for  displaying  the
results that are handed to it by the MCE Web service.

Karnatak et al. (2007) developed a client/server based MCE tool for site allocation
in the context of biodiversity conversation. The tool implements the Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP) originally developed by Saaty (1980). Similar to Bernard et al. (2003), all of the
MCE  functionality  is  located  on  the  server.  Consequently,  all  the  calculations  that  are
relevant to AHP take place on the server. The tool relies on ESRI’s ArcSDE for remote access
to an Oracle database in order to retrieve the data for multiple criteria evaluation, and on
ESRI’s ArcIMS for the preparation of the output of the AHP procedure in the form of a map.
A ‘thin’ client running in any standard Web browser fetches and presents the map to the user.
In the area of support for group decision processes, Dragicevic and Balram (2004)
Web GIS Collaborative
developed a set of Web-based tools for collaborative planning. Their 
framework  builds  upon  the  traditional  Delphi  method  and
Spatial  Delphi  (CSD) 
combines discourse tools, digital maps, and exploratory GIS functionality within a Delphi
planning process. The manipulation and visualization of spatial information is mediated
through  ESRI’s  ArcIMS  and  hosted  on  an  Apache  Web  server,  together  with  the  tools
that implement the components of the Delphi process. All functionality is concentrated
on  the  server.  A  standard  Web  browser  hosts  the  client  application  that  handles  the
invocation  of  server-side  operations  and  the  display  of  results.  A  facilitator  has  access
to  additional  tools  that  aid  in  the  management  and  monitoring  of  the  Delphi  process
(e.g. generation of documents, statistic tools, and participant database).

This  brief  overview  of  selected  literature  on  Web-based  SDSS  begs  the  question
about the merit of developing MCE functions and tools on the platform of distributed
architectures.  Should  a  decision  about  porting  MCE  tools  from  computer  desktops  to
the Web be based on trends in software design, including the recent trend of deploying
task-oriented functions as Web services, or should it be based on the analysis of trade-
offs between the two different architectures (integrated vs. distributed)? In a distributed
Web service architecture, Web services are encapsulated components with a clearly defined
functionality.  A  connection  to  a  Web  service  can  be  established  through  an  interface
that  necessarily  uses  HyperText  Transfer  Protocol  (HTTP)  as  a  protocol.  Hence,  all
exchanges of data between the client and the Web service have to be marshaled through
HTTP. This might possibly lead to a performance bottleneck for applications where large
quantities of data must be exchanged. The primary concerns of the developer of a Web
service, however, should be: (1) that the interface is clearly defined and accessible to the
client; (2) that the Web service functionality adheres to the interface definition; and (3)
that the input data is in the correct format as specified by the Web service description.
An  integrated  solution  consists  of  tightly  coupled  components  that  use  the  native
communication  infrastructure  of  the  programming  language  to  exchange  messages.
Access  to  a  database  takes  place  through  direct  connections  (e.g.  JDBC  in  the  case  of
Java), and marshalling is controlled by the programming language itself and usually not
exposed to the developer. Since all components reside on the same machine, performance
bottlenecks resulting from data input and output are unlikely to occur. At the same time
the accessibility of components within an integrated architecture is limited to the scope
of the programming language, since it does not expose itself to the “outside world” as
is the case with a Web service interface.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Choice Modeler

545

Different  needs  and  situations  call  for  the  use  of  MCE  as  part  of  SDSS  including
individual  versus  group  users,  time-critical  (such  as  crisis  management)  and  time  non-
critical (such as planning) applications, frequently changing application domains versus
stable domains, and advanced versus inexperienced users. A simple analysis of trade-offs
among  the  integrated  and  distributed  architectures  may  be  conducted  by  evaluating  a
number  of  characteristics  such  as  computational  performance,  scalability,  reliability,
portability  of  the  implementation,  and  extensibility  of  MCE  tools.  The  computational
performance and reliability favor tightly integrated (monolithic) architectures. However,
the  scalability,  portability,  and  extensibility  favor  distributed  architectures.  Hence,  the
choice of the architecture should be dictated by the application type and context.

Participatory  decision  situations  involve  dynamic  decision  processes,  diverse  user
information  needs,  and  various  participation  arrangements  ranging  from  same  place  –
same time to different place – different time. Under these circumstances, the distributed
architecture  for  MCE  tools  is  more  advantageous  than  the  tightly  integrated  architecture,
due  to  its  potential  for  high  portability,  scalability,  and  extensibility.  In  the  following
section we discuss the implementation of distributed architecture for CM.

3 Choice Modeler Architecture

Currently, the most common version of distributed architecture is the three-tier software
architecture for system implementation (Peng and Tsou 2003). The first tier, called the
, includes a user-side Web browser and user-resident Java applets/HTML documents.
client tier
Users  interact  with  the  client  tier  via  a  graphical  user  interface  (GUI).  The  primary
function of the client tier is to accept users’ data requests and to display the results. The
, includes the Web Server and the Server Connectors
second tier, called the 
(such as Servlet connectors or Active Server Pages – ASP connectors), which bridge the
,
data  storage  tier
communication  between  clients  and  the  server.  The  third  tier  is  the 
which includes the Database Server. The three-tier software architecture can be deployed
on different hardware configurations.

middleware tier

The  specific  implementation  of  three-tier  architecture  for  CM  is  comprised  of  the
client, the Choice Modeler server, and the database tier (Figure 1). The architecture in
Figure 1 implements the concept of “server-side” processing and a thin client. The client
component in the architecture is any Java-enabled Web browser, through which the user

Figure 1 Three-tier software architecture for Choice Modeler

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

546

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

communicates  with  the  MCE  functions  of  the  CM  server  and  the  database.  The  client
communication with the database occurs through the CM server. The relational database
stores  user  selections  for  various  functional  components  of  MCE  including  evaluation
criteria, criteria types (benefit, cost), criteria weights, and the results of MCE functions
executed by the user such as decision option ranking and sensitivity analysis. The user-
specific selections and evaluation results can be stored for multiple users. A one-to-one
relationship is maintained between a user and the user-specific data.

Data is organized into relations (tables) with a core user table related to other tables
containing decision options criteria, criterion scores, weights, and their derivates resulting
from the execution of various functions of MCE.

The CM server is responsible for retrieving data from the database and for executing
MCE functions selected by the user. Two alternative implementations of MCE functions
were considered, namely, implementing each MCE function as a separate Web service,
or implementing all MCE functions of CM as one Web service. The former alternative
may  involve  a  ‘thick’  client  establishing  a  transparent  chain  between  the  Web  services
while the latter involves a ‘thin’ client communicating with a data processing server. We
chose for CM the latter alternative for its superior communication performance between
the  thin  client  and  the  server.  The  overarching  concern  was  to  reduce  the  number  of
connections  between  the  client  and  the  server  to  as  few  as  possible  under  the  scenario
of  using  CM  in  a  participatory  decision  making  problem  that  might  involve  hundreds
of users.

The  decision  to  implement  the  CM  server  as  a  Web  service  was  dictated  by  its
potential  reusability  in  other  Web-based  SDSS.  In  adopting  the  concepts  of  server-side
processing and thin clients the architecture for CM is similar to architectural solutions
for  Web-based  MCE  proposed  by  others  (e.g.  Bernard  et  al.  2003,  Karnatak  et  al.
2007). The alternative architectural solutions, which were not adopted for CM, involve
a  thick  client  and  a  transparent  chain  between  the  Web  services.  The  decision  not  to
adopt the former was made in order to promote the MCE portability, which is easier to
achieve  with  a  thin  client  approach.  The  decision  not  to  adopt  the  latter  was  dictated
primarily  by  choosing  the  efficiency  and  reliability  of  data  communication  over  the
flexibility offered by chained Web services.

Choosing  a  thin  client  running  in  a  standard  Internet  browser  and  the  reliance  on
Web service architecture allows for the integration of CM into a web service infrastructure.
The usage of SOAP and WSDL enables service chaining and potentially allows for the
usage of CM in combination with technologies such as Ajax in a Web 2.0 framework.
Central to the Web 2.0 concept is the creative engagement of the user through rich
user interfaces and the collaborative creation of data (O’Reilly 2005). In CM, the access
to the database is limited to server-side components. In order to give the user control
over data, the CM functionality would need to be extended to allow for data upload by
the user.

The  implementation  followed  the  current  best  practices  of  creating  a  Web  service,
in  which  the  service  description  is  provided  in  Web  Service  Description  Language
(WSDL), the service invocation is handled according to Simple Object Access Protocol
(SOAP), and the data transport protocol is HTTP. The web server and the data server may
reside  on  the  same  physical  machine  or  on  separate  machines.  The  MCE  functions  of
the Web service were implemented in Java and the PostgreSQL object-relational database
using  the  PostGIS  plug-in  to  store  and  manage  data.  PostGIS  adds  support  for  storing
geographic objects in the PostgreSQL database.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

Choice Modeler

547

4 Multiple Criteria Evaluation Functions of Choice Modeler

Typical  MCE  functions  include  eliciting  preferences  in  regard  to  evaluation  criteria  in
the form of weights or trade-offs, standardizing criterion scores, combining standardized
scores  with  criterion  preferences  into  an  overall  evaluation  measure  for  each  decision
option, and testing the sensitivity of evaluation results to changes in criteria weights and
standardized scores. These functions typically align into a MCE workflow, which mirrors
the  steps  of  the  rational  model  of  choice  composed  of  intelligence,  design,  and  choice
(Malczewski  1999,  p.  96).  In  addition  to  these  standard  functions  CM  incorporates
extensive sensitivity analysis capabilities for support of groups participating in multiple
criteria evaluation processes (Figure 2).

The  workflow  schema  presented  in  Figure  2  shows  the  major  functional  clusters
comprising  CM:  global,  local,  and  spatial  sensitivity  analysis,  individual  and  group
ranking,  and  evaluation  agreement  assessment.  This  workflow  can  be  applied  to  any

Figure 2 A workflow flowchart for Choice Modeler

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

548

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

spatial MCE problem once the basic structure of the problem has been established and
the decision table is available. It is important to emphasize that the schema presented in
Figure 2 is not theoretically limited to supporting only one specific workflow. Different
alternative  MCE  workflows,  comprised  of  fewer  functional  clusters  than  depicted  in
Figure 2, can also be supported by Choice Modeler. For example, a workflow applicable
to a participatory planning situation might include only global sensitivity analysis, individual
ranking, group ranking, and the ranking agreement assessment.

4.1 Functional Clusters

Figure  3  presents  the  workflow  schema  in  greater  detail,  including  functional  clusters
that correspond to the steps of the workflow and more specific functions that build the
clusters. We describe the clusters and their functions below.

4.1.1 Global sensitivity analysis

The workflow presented in Figure 3 starts from reducing the cognitive complexity of the
decision  space  comprised  of  decision  options,  criteria,  and  criteria  weights.  This  is
accomplished  by  identifying  the  evaluation  criteria  that  contribute  the  most  and  those
that contribute the least to the ranking of decision options. The computational approach
to finding such criteria, called Global Sensitivity Analysis (GSA), decomposes the variance
of  average  shift  in  ranks  due  to  the  variability  in  criteria  weights,  and  involves  the
following three steps (Saisana et al. 2005):

1. Generate random weight samples of all criteria using probability distribution functions,

and for each sample compute the rank order of decision options.

2. For  each  rank  order,  calculate  the  average  shift  in  ranks  (ASR)  compared  to  the
rank order computed with equal weights. The ASR captures the relative shift in the
position of the entire set of options and quantifies it as the sum of absolute differences
between the current option rank and the reference (equal weight) rank, divided by
the number of all options.

3. Using  results  from  steps  (1)  and  (2)  calculate  a  first  order  index  and  a  total  order

 and 
S
index (
i

S
Ti

, respectively).

  quantifies  a  fractional  contribution  of  a  given  criterion  weight  to  the  variance  in
S
i
 captures the overall contribution
S
option ranking taken independently from other weights. 
Ti
of a given criterion weight including its interactivity with other criteria. As a result, it is
possible  to  examine  the  complexity  of  the  interrelationships  of  the  evaluation  criteria  and
exclude those criteria that play a minor role in the evaluation. The elimination of incon-
sequential criteria clearly helps to reduce the cognitive burden of performing the evaluation.

4.1.2 Individual ranking

Following the results of GSA, the user may choose to evaluate decision options using a
subset of criteria identified as the influential criteria. The rank order is computed based
on criteria, criterion values, and criterion weights, which are aggregated into an overall
evaluation score using an Ideal Point function based on the TOPSIS technique (Hwang
and Yoon 1981). The decision options are rank ordered on the basis of descending evalua-
tion score values from the most to the least favored.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

Choice Modeler

549

Figure 3 Detailed workflow schema for Choice Modeler

Three  additional  functions  can  be  used  to  enumerate  sensitive  factors  of  the  rank
order (see FC2 in Figure 3). The Pairwise Option Path Similarity function calculates for
any  two  options  the  non-weighed  similarity  index  of  all  selected  criteria.  If,  for  the
majority of criteria, the pairwise option difference in scores for each respective criterion
is below the user-specified threshold, the two options are considered indifferent (Belton

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

550

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

and Stewart 2002). This function may be helpful if the user wants to reduce the number
of options but is uncertain as to which options to delete. If two options score similarly,
then  one  of  them  may  be  deleted  based  on  intangibles  that  are  not  expressed  by  the
evaluation criteria. The other two functions include Critical Pairwise Score Difference,
which  pinpoints  those  options  that  score  close  to  each  other  and  thus  are  potentially
prone  to  rank  switching,  and  Pairwise  Break  Even,  which  calculates  the  necessary
change in the weight of a selected evaluation criterion so that the first and second rank
options can switch their ranks (Pannell 1997).

4.1.3 Group ranking

Individual  rankings  are  synthesized  into  a  group  ranking  by  computing  a  modified
Borda score. The rankings are treated as votes. The procedure for computing the Borda
score takes into consideration the order of significance of what is being voted upon (like
decision options). The voting position of a decision option is determined by adding the
ranks  for  each  option  from  every  voter  using  the  Borda  social  preference  function
(Hwang and Lin 1987). The ranked vote method prevents a contentious option, which
ranks  very  high  with  some  participants  and  very  low  with  others,  from  winning.  The
algorithm for the modified Borda score is presented in Appendix A.

4.1.4 Agreement assessment

The  role  of  agreement  assessment  functions  (rank  variance,  ranking  concordance,  and
peer-to-group  popularity)  is  to  inform  the  participants  about  the  differences  between
their  individual  rankings  and  the  overall  group  ranking.  The  rank  variance  function
helps  to  establish  the  level  of  convergence/divergence  among  the  group  members  in
regard  to  the  position  of  each  decision  option  in  the  ranking.  This  is  accomplished  by
computing a ranked vote variance for each decision option. Thus, information about the
position of a given decision option in the ranking is enhanced with the level of agreement
about  this  position  (rank).  The  algorithm  for  the  ranked  vote  variance  along  with  an
example is presented in Appendix B.

In  addition  to  group  rank  order  and  ranking  variance,  CM  offers  a  function,
called  Ranking  Concordance,  for  assessing  the  overall  ranking  agreement  between  an
individual and a group. The measure of agreement is based on determining a shift in the
ranks  between  the  user  and  group  rankings,  and  is  defined  as  follows  (Saisana  et  al.
2005):

R
S

 

=

 

 

rank Y
o
ref

(

) 

 

rank Y
o

(

)

−

(1)

M

⎛
∑1
⎜
M
⎝

=
1

o

⎞
⎟
⎠

  is  the  average  shift  in  ranks, 
R
where 
S
 is the rank of decision option 
Y
evaluation, rank 
o
o
 is the rank of decision option 
Y
o

M

  is  the  number  of  decision  options  under
 in the individual ranking, and 

rank

o

ref

 in the group ranking.
The  average  shift  in  ranks  captures  a  relative  shift  in  the  position  of  the  entire  set
of options. Rank shift is quantified as the average of the absolute differences in option
  options.  Here,  the  group
ranks  with  respect  to  a  reference  prioritization  over  all 
prioritization  is  considered  as  the  reference  prioritization.  Equation  (1)  helps  in  deter-
mining the average shift in ranks between the two rank orders.

M

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
, 2008, 12(4)

Transactions in GIS

 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Choice Modeler

551

The  average  shift  in  rank  value  (

)  does  not  tell  us  much  about  the  agreement
R
S
between the rankings, and hence it must be related to a reference value. We use for the
reference  value  the  worse  case  scenario  given  by  two  symmetrically  different  rankings
where  the  highest  ranked  option  in  the  individual  ranking  is  the  lowest  ranked  option
in the group ranking, etc. The reference ranking is defined formally as follows:

(2)

(3)

(4)

M

where 
M
(
composite indicator is defined as follows:

  is  the  number  of  decision  options  and 
d

 + 1)/2 when 

 is odd and 

/2 when 

 = 

M

M

M

d

  is  defined  depending  on 

  =
 is even. Finally the Ranking Concordance

  as 

M

d

R

_
S worst

=

 

 

 *  (

  )
d M d
 

−

2
M

R
C

 

=

 

 
1

−

 

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎜
⎝

R
S

R

_
S worst

⎞
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟
⎠

 *  %
100

The process of agreement assessment can be further extended by estimating the causes
of differences in option rankings among the participants. This information enhances group
deliberation by directing the participants to a discussion on the most conflicting issues
related to the decision situation rather than forcing them to unravel the nuances of MCE
mathematics in search for the sources of ranking discrepancies. In particular, the potential
reasons for the differences in option rankings can be derived from the explicit comparisons
of  criteria  lists  and  criteria  weights  between  an  individual  participant  and  a  group.  The
participant starts from comparing his or her criterion choices with the criteria lists of other
participants. This comparison reveals the frequency of the corresponding criterion pairs.
For each criterion its presence on the compared lists is accounted for in the following formula:

N

∑

x
≠
=
k n
1
,
−
N
 

km

1
 

P
nm

 

k

=

 

 * 

100

P

m

n-
N

 was selected by stakeholder 

n 
, 
m
peer-to-group popularity
th stakeholder 
x
 is the total number of stakeholders, and the variable 

 stand
k
and 
 
is the 
where 
nm
 equals one
for stakeholders, 
 and zero otherwise. For a given stakeholder
if criterion 
and  an  evaluation  criterion,  Equation  (4)  assesses  the  proportion  of  other  participants
who  selected  this  particular  criterion  compared  to  the  total  number  of  participants  in
the group excluding the stakeholder himself. An example of the peer-to-group popularity
measure is given in Appendix C.

 of criterion 

k

km

4.1.5 Local sensitivity analysis

Following the agreement assessment the participant may decide to accept his/her current
ranking  of  decision  options  or  investigate  the  stability  of  the  ranking  with  sensitivity
analysis.  The  former  ends  the  MCE  workflow  while  the  latter  leads  to  two  additional
clusters of functions: Local Sensitivity Analysis (LSA) and Spatial Sensitivity Analysis.

In LSA, the participants may add a new criterion to a criteria list; delete a criterion
from  the  list;  or  change  (increase/decrease)  a  criterion  weight.  A  simple  rule  of  thumb
may be followed in establishing the sensitivity of rank-order to shifting weights, which

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS

, 2008, 12(4)

552

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

states that if the change in a criterion weight by n-percent results in the change in a rank-
order by less than n-percent then one may conclude that the ranking is not sensitive to
shifts in the importance of a given criterion (Longley et al. 2005).

Each of the changes involving the criterion list and criterion weights may affect the
rank-order of options, and thus a new Ideal Point calculation is triggered, followed by
another group aggregation and agreement assessment.

4.1.6 Spatial sensitivity analysis

In a general sense, the purpose of spatial sensitivity analysis is to evaluate: (1) the effects
of uncertainty in the geographical distribution of criterion values; (2) spatial variability
of  criterion  importance  (weights);  and  (3)  distributional  effects  of  decision  options  on  the
stability of option ranking. CM offers one specific function for analyzing the distributional
effects of decision options using distance relationships. The function computes a matrix
of spatial weights based on the distances between the user-designated locations, reflecting
user’s  spatial  preferences,  and  the  locations  of  decision  options.  Such  distance-derived
weights  are  then  used  to  recalculate  composite  evaluation  scores  for  the  options.  The
recalculated  scores  may  modify  the  rank  order  of  options.  If  the  user  is  satisfied  with
this  spatially  weighted  ranking,  s/he  may  accept  it,  which  triggers  the  recalculation  of
group ranking and the agreement assessment.

4.1.7 Choice modeler and SDSS/PSS

CM was designed to be either a standalone tool or a component of SDSS. Consequently,
CM can be also utilized in Planning Support Systems (PSS) which, according to Harris
(2001) and Klosterman (2001), should include tools for the evaluation of strategic plans
and the consequences of what-if scenarios. Within the realm of SDSS/PSS, CM addresses
the critical issue of incorporating individual preferences into the decision process. Given
the  planning  process,  CM  could  enhance  the  analysis  of  the  sensitivity  of  plans  to
changes  in  input  values  that  are  associated  with  the  criteria  used  for  plan  assessment.
The elimination of inconsequential criteria with GSA allows for shifting the focus of the
‘with-without’ analysis from a large set of planning criteria to those criteria that have a
crucial  impact  on  the  variability  of  plans.  The  functional  cluster  of  individual  ranking
(Figure  3)  can  be  adapted  as  a  tool  that  provides  an  index  of  plan  performance  in  the
form  of  composite  scores  of  what-if  scenarios.  Given  the  fact  that  alternative  plans
should  be  as  different  as  possible  (Harris  2001),  the  pairwise  option  path  similarity
index  can  be  used  to  eliminate  plans  that  perform  alike  with  respect  to  the  planning
criteria used. Finally, in the case of collaborative planning, the decision about preferred
plans should be based on input from multiple stakeholders. The group ranking functional
cluster is designed to accomplish this goal.

4.2 Choice Modeler and Participatory Geographic Information System 
for Transportation

CM was originally developed in the context of the “Participatory Geographic Information
System for Transportation Decision Making” research project conducted at the University
of Washington, University of Wyoming, and San Diego State University (Nyerges et al.
2006a,  Participatory  Geographic  Information  System  for  Transportation  –  PGIST;

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

Choice Modeler

553

Figure 4 Criterion weighting and pairwise break even functions

http://www.pgist.org).  PGIST  and  subsequently  CM  were  designed  as  tools  aimed  at
finding  out  what  Internet  platform  designs  and  capabilities,  including  Geographic
Information Systems technology, could improve public participation in analytic-deliberative
transportation decision making within large groups.

Due to time and budget constraints only one MCE function was adopted in PGIST,
namely,  criteria  weighting  using  the  rating  technique  (Malczewski  1999),  which  is  a
component  of  individual  ranking  (see  MCE  workflow  in  Figure  3).  We  have  included
the screen mockup of criterion weighting and pairwise break even functions developed
for  a  standard,  Java-enabled  Web  browser  in  order  to  give  the  reader  a  sense  of  how
CM  functions  could  be  accessed  by  the  users  (Figure  4).  The  function  screen,  just  like
any  other  function  screen  in  PGIST,  is  composed  of  a  combination  of slates  and  bars,
where the slate is the main part of the screen presenting different information structures

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

554

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

(maps, charts, threaded conversations, etc.), and the bar is a collection of tools available
for the analysis with MCE functions (Nyerges et al. 2006b).

The  function  screen  in  Figure  4  shows  two  MCE  functions  of  Choice  Modeler
presented in the context of an online experiment called “Let’s Improve Transportation”,
which took place between 16 October and 13 November 2007 (see http://www.letsim-
provetransportation.org for additional details). The experiment, which was run on the
PGIST platform installed on the server of the Department of Geography at the University
of Washington, involved 135 randomly selected residents of the King, Snohomish, and
Pierce  counties  in  the  western  part  of  Washington  State.  The  participants  discussed,
analyzed and recommended a package of 27 transportation improvement projects in the
Puget Sound Metropolitan Area. The usability results of PGIST, including the criterion
weighting function depicted in Figure 4, are still being evaluated as of the writing time
of  this  article.  The  slate  in  Figure  4  is  filled  with  nine  criteria  used  by  the  experiment
participants in evaluating various transportation improvement projects. The sliding bars
allow each participant to adjust his/her weights assigned to the criteria according to the
rating technique. Each bar reflecting a criterion weight assigned by a participant has a
corresponding bar showing the current average weight at a given moment of time during
the  participatory  evaluation  process.  The  horizontal  bar  located  at  the  bottom  of  the
function screen shows another MCE function implemented in CM called Pairwise Break
Even, which is one of three functions that can be used to enumerate sensitive factors of
the  rank  order  (see  FC2  in  Figure  3).  The  function  returns  the  weight  change  for  a
selected criterion, which would be necessary for the runner-up option to switch the rank
with the top-ranked option.

5 Conclusions

In this article, we outlined the rationale behind applying Web service based architecture
for multiple criteria evaluation of decision options involving individuals and groups. We
also  presented  a  prototype  functional  cluster,  called  Choice  Modeler,  which  extends
multiple  criteria  evaluation  by  addressing  a  number  of  uncertainties  associated  with
decision criteria, criteria weights, and decision options. Three functional approaches to
sensitivity analysis adopted in CM, including local, global, and spatial sensitivity analysis,
allow for a systematic treatment of uncertainties associated with MCE components. The
CM  design  also  includes  a  novel  use  of  database  to  support  group  MCE  processes
through  maintaining  a  one-to-one  relationship  between  each  individual  user  and  the
user-specific data. Such organization of the database allows both individual data storage
for each user and supports group ranking and agreement assessment functions.

CM represents a first step in the direction of providing multiple criteria evaluation
functions for individuals and groups in the form of distributed Web services. MCE Web
services, that are based on distributed architectures, can be conceptualized as a library
of plug-and-play tools that can be reconfigured and connected on an as needed basis by
software  engineers  to  support  a  variety  of  collaborative  decision  processes,  which  are
idiosyncratic in nature but at the same time share certain evaluative process steps. These
shared  steps  such  as  defining  decision/evaluation  criteria,  expressing  preferences  in
regard  to  the  criteria,  ranking  of  decision  options,  and  voting  on  decision  options  can
be encapsulated in Web services, which can eventually become a library of participatory
spatial decision support services.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

Choice Modeler

555

Future  research  efforts  should  pursue  the  agenda  of  developing  MCE  functions  as
open  source  standardized  Web  services,  similar  to  work  reported  by  Hall  and  Leahy
(2006).  Such  services  could  then  be  published  on  the  Web  and  create  a  MCE  service
infrastructure. Standardized services could be linked through a mechanism called service
chaining, which would facilitate their reuse and support of various participatory decision
making  workflows.  Implementing  MCE  functions  as  Web  services  might  also  spur  the
development  of  meta-knowledge,  helping  to  select  an  appropriate  service  for  a  given
evaluation  task.  An  example  can  be  a  choice  between  utility  function-based  decision
rules and outranking decision rules in MCE.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  acknowledge  thoughtful  comments  of  two  anonymous  reviewers  who
contributed to the final version of the manuscript. This research was supported in part
by National Science Foundation Grant No. EIA 0325916, funded through the Information
Technology Research Program, and managed in the Digital Government Program. The
principal  investigator  on  this  project  was  Timothy  L.  Nyerges,  and  the  co-principal
investigators were G. Scott Rutherford and Terry Brooks at the University of Washington,
Piotr Jankowski at San Diego State University, and Rhonda Young at the University of
Wyoming. The authors are solely responsible for the content.

References

Andrienko N V and Andrienko G L 1999 Interactive maps for visual data exploration. International

Journal of Geographical Information Systems 13: 355–74

Andrienko N V and Andrienko G L 2001 Intelligent support for geographic data analysis and decision
making in the Web. Journal of Geographic Information and Decision Analysis 5: 115–28

Andrienko  G  L,  Andrienko  N  V,  and  Jankowski  P  2003  Building  spatial  decision  support  tools

for individuals and groups. Journal of Decision Systems 12: 193–208

Armstrong  M  P  1993  Perspectives  on  the  development  of  group  decision  support  systems  for

locational problem solving. Geographic Systems 1: 69– 81

Armstrong M P, Rushton G, Honey R, Dalziel B, Lolonis P, De S, and Densham P 1991 Decision
support for regionalization: A Spatial Decision Support System for regionalizing service delivery
systems. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 15: 37–53

Barton  J,  Plume  B,  and  Parolin  B  2005  Public  participation  in  a  spatial  decision  support  system

for public housing, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 29: 631–53

Beinat  E  and  Nijkamp  P  1998  Multicriteria  analysis  for  land-use  management.  In  Beinat  E  and
Nijkamp  P  (eds)  Multiple  Criteria  Decision  Making:  An  Integrated  Approach.  Dordrecht,
Kluwer: 253 –70

Belton  V  and  Stewart  T  J  2002  Performance  modeling:  Outranking.  In  Beinat  E  and  Nijkamp  P
(eds) Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis. An Integrated Approach. Dordrecht, Kluwer: 106–
11

Bernard L, Ostländer N, and Rinner C 2003 Impact assessment for the Barents Sea region: A
geodata  infrastructure  approach.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  AGILE  Conference  on  Geo-
graphic Information Science, Lyon, France

Berners-Lee T, Hendler J, and Lassila O 2001 The Semantic Web: A new form of web content that
is meaningful to computers will unleash a revolution of new possibilities. Scientific American
284(5): 34– 43

Best B D, Halpin P N, Fujioka E, Read A J, Qian S S, Hazen L J, and Schick R S 2007 Geospatial
Web services within a scientific workflow: Predicting marine mammal habitats in a dynamic
environment. Ecological Informatics 2: 210–23

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

556

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

Burton J, Plume J, and Parolin B 2005 Public participation in a spatial decision support system for

public housing. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 29: 617–29

Carver  S  J  1991  Integrating  multi-criteria  evaluation  with  geographical  information  systems.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 5: 321–39

Carver  S,  Evans  A,  Kingston  R,  and  Turton  I  1998  Geographical  Information  Systems  on  the
World  Wide  Web:  Improving  public  participation  in  environmental  decision  making.  In
Proceedings of Conference of the European Association for the Study of Science and Technology,
Lisbon, Portugal

Chen J, He C, Jiang J, and Han G 2008 Reconciliation of inconsistent perspectives in collaborative

GIS. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 35: 77–89

Choi  J-Y,  Engel  B  A,  and  Farnsworth  R  L  2005a  Web-based  GIS  and  spatial  decision  support

system for watershed management. Journal of Hydroinformatics 7: 165–74

Choi  J-Y,  Engel  B  A,  Theller  L,  and  Harbor  J  2005b  Utilizing  Web-based  GIS  and  SDSS  for
hydrological  land  use  change  impact  assessment.  Transactions  of  the  American  Society  of
Agricultural Engineers 48: 815–22

Cowen  D  1988  GIS  versus  CAD  versus  DBMS:  What  are  the  differences?  Photogrammetric

Engineering & Remote Sensing 54: 1551–5

Densham P J and Goodchild M F 1989 Spatial Decision Support Systems: A research agenda.

In Proceedings of GIS/LIS ’89, Phoenix, Arizona: 707–16

Densham  P  J  and  Rushton  G  1988  Spatial  Decision  Support  Systems  for  locational  planning.  In
Golledge  R  and  Timmermans  H  (eds)  Behavioural  Modelling  in  Geography  and  Planning.
London, Croom-Helm: 56–90

Dragicevic  S  and  Balram  S  2004  A  Web  GIS  collaborative  framework  to  structure  and  manage

distributed planning processes. Journal of Geographical Systems 6: 133 –53

Dymond  R  L,  Regmi  B,  Lohani  V  K,  and  Dietz  R  2004  Interdisciplinary  Web-enabled  spatial
decision  support  system  for  watershed  management.  Journal  of  Water  Resources  Planning
and Management 130: 290–300

Eastman  J  R,  Kyem  P  A  K,  Toledano  J,  and  Jin  W  1993  GIS  and  Decision  Making.  Geneva,

UNITAR

Faber  B,  Watts  R,  Hautaluoma  J,  Knutson  J,  Wallace  W,  and  Wallace  L  1994  A  groupware-
enabled GIS. In Proceedings of the GIS ’94 Symposium, Vancouver, British Columbia: 551–
61

Gomes E G and Lins M P E 2002 Integrating geographical information systems and multi-criteria

methods: A case study. Annals of Operations Research 116: 243–69

Hall  G  B  and  Leahy  M  G  2006  Internet-based  spatial  decision  support  using  open  source  tools.
In Balram S and Dragicevic S (eds) Collaborative Geographic Information Systems. Hershey,
PA, Idea Group: 237– 62

Harris B 2001 Sketch planning: Systematic methods in planning and its support. In Brail R K and
Klosterman  R  E  (eds)  Planning Support Systems Integrating Geographic Information Systems,
Models, and Visualization Tools. Redlands, CA, ESRI Press: 59–80

Hwang C-L and Lin M-J 1986 Group Decision Making Under Multiple Attribute Decision Making:

Methods and Applications. Berlin, Springer-Verlag

Hwang  C-L  and  Yoon  K  1981  Multiple  Attribute  Decision  Making:  Methods  and  Applications.

Berlin, Springer-Verlag

Jankowski  P  1995  Integrating  geographical  information  systems and multiple  criteria  decision
making methods. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 9: 251–73
Jankowski P and Stasik M 1997 Spatial understanding and decision support system: A prototype

for public GIS. Transactions in GIS 2: 73–84

Jankowski  P,  Andrienko  G  L,  and  Andrienko  N  V  2001  Map-centered  exploratory  approach  to
multiple criteria spatial decision making. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science 15: 101–27

Jankowski P, Nyerges T, Smith A, Moore T J, and Horvath E 1997 Spatial group choice: A spatial
decision support tool for collaborative decision making. International Journal of Geograph-
ical Information Systems 11: 577–602

Joerin  F,  Theriault  M,  and  Musy  A  2001  Using  GIS  and  outranking  multi-criteria  analysis  for
land-use  suitability  assessment.  International  Journal  of  Geographical  Information  Science
15: 153 –74

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

Choice Modeler

557

Jung C and Sun C-H 2006 Development of a GIService on spatial data mining for location choice of
convenience stores in Taipei City. In Wu H and Zhu Q (eds) The International Society For Optical
Engineering.  Bellingham,  WA,  The  International  Society  For  Optical  Engineering  doi:  10.1117/
12.713149

Karnatak  H  C,  Saran  S,  Bhatia  K,  and  Roy  P  S  2007  Multicriteria  spatial  decision  analysis  in  a

Web GIS environment. Geoinformatica 11: 407–29

Keen P G W and Scott-Morton M S 1978 Decision Support Systems: An Organizational Perspective.

Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley

Kingston R, Carver S, Evans A, and Turton I 2000 Web-based public participation geographical
information systems: An aid to local environmental decision-making, Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems 24: 109–25

Klosterman R E 2001 Planning support systems: A new perspective on computer-aided planning,
planning support systems. In Brail R K and Klosterman R E (eds) Planning Support Systems
Integrating  Geographic  Information  Systems,  Models,  and  Visualization  Tools.  Redlands,
CA, ESRI Press: 1–23

Laaribi A, Chevallier J J, and Martel J M 1996 A spatial decision aid: A multi-criteria evaluation

approach. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 20: 351–66

Longley  P  A,  Goodchild  M  F,  Maguire  D  J,  and  Rhind  D  W  2005  Geographic  Information

Systems and Science (Second Edition). New York, John Wiley and Sons

MacEachren  A  M  2005  Moving  geovisualization  toward  support  for  groupwork.  In  Dykes  J,
MacEachren  A  M,  and  Kraak  M-J  (eds)  Exploring  Geovisualization.  Amsterdam,  Elsevier:
445–62

MacEachren  A  M  and  Brewer  I  2004  Developing  a  conceptual  framework  for  visually-enabled
geocollaboration. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 18: 1–34
Malczewski  J  1996  A  GIS-based  approach  to  multiple  criteria  group  decision-making.  International

Journal of Geographical Information Science 10: 955–71

Malczewski J 1999 GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Malczewski J 2006 GIS-based multicriteria decision analysis: A survey of the literature. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science 20: 703 –26

Marinoni O 2005 A stochastic spatial decision support system based on PROMETHEE. International

Journal of Geographical Information Science 19: 51– 68

Nyerges T, Brooks T, Jankowski P, Rutherford G S, and Young R 2006a Web portal implementa-
tion to support public participation in transportation decision making. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research, San Diego, California
Nyerges  T,  Ramsey  K,  and  Wilson  M  2006b  Design  considerations  for  an  Internet  portal  to
support  public  participation  in  transportation  improvement  decision  making.  In  Balram  S
and  Dragicevic  S  (eds)  Collaborative  Geographic  Information  Systems.  Hershey,  PA,  Idea
Group: 207–35

OGC  2008  OpenGIS  Specifications  (Standards).  WWW  document,  http://www.opengeospatial.

org/standards

O’Reilly T 2005 What is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation
of  Software.  WWW  document,  http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/
30/what-is-web-20.html

Pannell  D  1997  Sensitivity  analysis  of  normative  economic  models:  Theoretical  framework  and

practical strategies. Agricultural Economics 16: 139–52

Pereira J M C and Duckstein L 1993 A multiple criteria decision-making approach to GIS-based land
suitability evaluation. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 7: 407–24
Peng Z R and Tsou M H 2003 Internet GIS: Distributed Geographic Information Services for the

Internet and Wireless Networks. New York, John Wiley and Sons

Rinner  C  2003  Web-based  spatial  decision  support:  Status  and  research  directions.  Journal  of

Geographic Information and Decision Analysis 7: 14 – 31

Rinner  C  and  Malczewski  J  2002  Web-enabled  spatial  decision  analysis  using  ordered  weighted

averaging. Journal of Geographical Systems 4: 385– 403

Saaty T 1980 The Analytic Hierarchy Process. New York, McGraw Hill
Saisana  M,  Saltelli  A,  and  Tarantola  S  2005  Uncertainty  and  sensitivity  analysis  techniques  as
tools for the quality assessment of composite indicators. Journal of Royal Statistical Society
168: 307–23

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

558

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

Sprague  R  H  and  Carlson  E  D  1982  Building  Effective  Decision  Support  Systems.  Englewood

Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall

Stock  C,  Bishop  I  D,  O’Connor  A  N,  Chen  T,  Pettit  C  J,  and  Aurambout  J-P  2008  SIEVE:
Collaborative  decision-making  in  an  immersive  online  environment.  Cartography  and
Geographic Information Science 35: 133– 44

Tkach  R  J  and  Simonovic  S  P  1997  A  new  approach  to  multi-criteria  decision  making  in  water

resources. Journal of Geographic Information and Decision Analysis 1: 25–43

Wang L and Cheng Q 2007 Design and implementation of a Web-based spatial decision support
system  for  flood  forecasting  and  flood  risk  mapping.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Geoscience  and
Remote Sensing Symposium, Barcelona, Spain

Yu  F-C,  Chen  C-Y,  Lin  S-C,  Lin  Y-C,  Wu  S-Y,  and  Cheung  K-W  2006  A  web-based  decision
support  system  for  slopeland  hazard  warning.  Environmental  Monitoring  and  Assessment
127: 419–28

Zhu  X,  McCosker  J,  Dale  A  P,  and  Bischof  R  J  2001  Web-based  decision  support  for  regional

vegetation management. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 25: 605–27

The algorithm for computing Ranked Vote Score (a modified Borda score)

Determine the number of unique items voted for (N)
Find the voter with the highest count of items voted for (C)
Determine the worst item position in a vote as follows:

T
i

 

=

 

−
i
W P
 
j

 

K

∑

=
1

j

where  Ti denotes  the  sum  of  the  position  values  for  the  i-th  item  voted  for;  K  denotes
the  number  of  voters; 
  denotes  the  position  the  i-th  vote  item  has  in  the  j-th  voter’s
ordered  vote;  starting  from  0  (the  highest  position  in  the  vote  is  zero).  If  the  j-th
voter did not vote for the i-th item then 
 equals the number of items in the j-th voter’s
vote.

i
Pj

i
Pj

=

 

S
i

 

T
i
 * 
K W

 * 

100

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

Appendix A

Step 1:

If C + 1 < N:

W = C + 1

Else:

W = N

Step 2:

∀ item voted for:

Step 3:

∀ item voted for:

Choice Modeler

559

where Si denotes the score (modified Borda) for the ith vote item.
The voted items are then ordered based on the Si score.
Every  item  that  a  voter  did  not  vote  on  is  given  a  position  of  one  beyond  the  last
position for this voter. This means that the items not voted on are treated equally and
they occupy the same last position in the ranked vote.

Appendix B

The algorithm for computing the Variance of Ranked Vote Score.

Step 1:

Same as in “Ranked Score” algorithm.

Step 2:

∀ item voted for:

T

V
i

K

K

=

 

∑∑

 

=
1

j

= +

m j

 
1

i
P
j

−

 

 

i
P
m

V
T i

where 
 denotes the sum of the absolute differences for the i-th item for every pair of
 denotes the position the i-th vote item has in
votes; K denotes the number of voters; 
the j-th voter’s ordered vote starting from 0 (the highest position in the vote is zero). If
the  j-th  voter  did  not  vote  on  the  i-th  item 
  equals  the  number  of  items  in  the  j-th
voter’s vote, and j, m ∈ K.

i
Pj

i
Pj

Step 3:

∀ item voted for:

V
i

 

=

 

W
(

 

−

1
  ) * 

T

>

 

V
i
K
2

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜
⎝

<

 

 * 

⎞
⎟
⎠

K
2

 * 

100

i
i
P Pj
(
, 
m

)
  for  which  the  absolute  difference  in  the  voting  position 

where  Vi  denotes  the  variance  for  the  i-th  vote  item;  (> K/2)  represents  the  number  of
vote  pairs 
  is
greater than the ratio K/2 where K denotes the number of voters; (> K/2)represents the
)
number  of  vote  pairs 
  for  which  the  absolute  difference  in  the  voting  position
|
i
P
j

i
i
P Pj
(
, 
m
|
 is smaller than the ratio K/2.

i
P
m

i
P
m

i
P
j

 – 

 −

 

|

|

Numeric Example of Computing the Ranked Voted Score and Its Variance

Assume there are three individuals (voters) participating in an evaluation (V1, V2, V3)
and five decision options being evaluated (vote items: A, B, C, D, E). The matrix below
represents the result of a group vote, such that each voter has voted ones an ordered list
of vote items:

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

560

P Jankowski, A-L Zielinska and M Swobodzinski

Voters

V1 V2 V3

A   B   E

B   C   D

C   A   A

D

Vote position 

i
Pj

0

1

2

3

C + 1 = 5

N = 5

K = 3

Borda Score for A-item
TA = (5 − 0) + (5 − 2) + (5 − 2) = 11

SA 

=

 

11
3 5
 * 

 * 

100
 

=

 

73

Variance for A-item

V  
TA

=

|
 

0
 

−

 

2

|
 

+

|
 

0
 

−

 

2

|
 

+

|
 

−
3 3
 
 

|
 

=

 

4

  .=
1 5

 

K
2

VA 

=

 

4
) * 

−
5 1
(  

2 1
 * 

 * 

100
 

=

50
 

Appendix C

An example of computing the peer-to-group popularity measure.

Table  C1  demonstrates  the  peer-to-group  popularity  heuristics  for  one  of  seven
participants  that  selected  five  out  of  seven  criteria.  As  an  example,  consider  the  popu-
larity  of  criterion  C1  which  was  chosen  by  four  participants  apart  from  S7.  Therefore,
the popularity of this criterion amounts to 4/6 (67%) of other users.

The  information  about  the  criteria  choices  can  be  augmented  with  information
about  the  importance  assigned  to  the  favored  criteria.  Equation  (5)  provides  a  simple
measure to accomplish this task:

W

nm

 * 

100

(5)

N

∑

i
km
≠
= =
k n
k
1
,
 
N

 

∑

x
≠
=
k n
1
,

k

km

where n, k, m, and xkm has the same meaning as in Equation (4), ikm is a weight assigned
to criterion m by participant k, and Wnm represents participant’s n peer-to-group weight

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

Choice Modeler

561

Table  C1 An  example  of  a  decision  table  for  computing  peer-to-group  heuristics  for
stakeholder  S7:  Sn  –  stakeholder  n,  Cm  –  criterion  m,  P7m  –  peer-to-group  popularity  of
criterion  m  for  S7,  W7m –  peer-to-group  weight  of  criterion  m  for  S7.  Note  that  the  criteria
selected  by  a  particular  stakeholder  are  in  bold  frames,  whereas  values  in  SnCm  cells
represent criteria weights.

C1

40

S1
S2
S3
S4
20
S5
50
S6
15
S7
14
Example for S7:
P7m
67
W7m
31

C2

10
15
40
15

40

83
24

C3

35

50

5
26

50
30

C4

5

40

25
5

67
19

C5

C6

C7

45
50
20
15
18
20
25

100
28

7
15
15

33
11

20

0
NA

for criterion m. The above equation averages the weight assigned to a selected criterion
by  other  users  that  chose  it  as  their  favored  criterion.  Similarly  to  the  peer-to-group
popularity measure, the proposed peer-to-group weight approach excludes the participant
for whom the measure is calculated.

Following the example in Table C1 we can calculate a peer-to-group weight for the
first criterion and the participant S7, which is simply the average of weights derived from
decision makers S1, S4, S5, and S6, and equals 125/4 (31%).

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Transactions in GIS, 2008, 12(4)

