This article was downloaded by: [Dalhousie University]
On: 01 June 2013, At: 06:34
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street,
London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of
Geographical Information
Science
Publication details, including instructions for
authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

GIS as media?
Daniel Z. Sui & Michael F. Goodchild
Published online: 06 Aug 2010.

To cite this article: Daniel Z. Sui & Michael F. Goodchild (2001): GIS as media?,
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15:5, 387-390

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810110038924

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/
terms-and-conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study
purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution,
reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any
form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make
any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or
up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae, and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher
shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings, demand, or
costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.

int. j. geographical information science, 2001, vol. 15, no. 5, 387± 390

Guest Editorial

GIS as media?

DANIEL Z. SUI
Department of Geography, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843-3147 , USA; e-mail: D-Sui@tamu.edu.

and MICHAEL F. GOODCHILD
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, and Department of
Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060 , USA

The dazzling development of GIS technology in recent years has rendered each
of the traditional, mostly instrumental, views of GIS—as spatial database, mapping
tool, and spatial analytical tool—inadequate to capture the fundamental essence of
this technology and its social implications. Each year brings new software packages
from innovative developers that are easier to use, more powerful, and more easily
adopted by users with minimal training. GIS and mapping tools are increasingly
available on the World Wide Web (WWW), and an increasing number of sites oŒer
advanced GIS services such as route (cid:142) nding and geocoding. In-vehicle navigation
systems using GIS technology are becoming part of our daily lives (Cowen 1994 ).
In the next two years cellphones in the US will be required to be geographically
enabled—to be able to report their current location to an accuracy of 100 m—in the
interests of accurate response to emergency calls. New imagery is becoming available
from commercial sources with spatial resolutions as (cid:142) ne as 1 m, and is being distrib-
uted through new mechanisms such as distributed geolibraries and spatial data
clearinghouses (NRC 1993, 1999). New methods of data documentation are being
used to support widespread sharing of spatial data via the Internet. These new trends
contrast sharply with the earlier view of GIS that prevailed into the early 1990s, as
tools contained within a standalone computing system, serving the needs of their
professional users by performing various forms of analysis that were too tedious,
time-consuming, or expensive to perform by hand, on data collected and assembled
for the purpose. These latest new developments in GIS have convinced us of the
need for new conceptualizations (or metaphors, for lack of a better term) for what
GIS actually is and will become in the near future. We believe that the complex
relationship between GIS and society can be better understood if one conceives of
GIS as new media.

Media are generally understood as means of sending messages or communicating
information to the general public, and mass media are the instruments by which
mass communication takes place in modern societies. Mass media are also the most
eŒective means of broadcasting information to large numbers of people in a short
period of time. In a very general sense, GIS can be understood as a new technological

Internationa l Journal of Geographica l Information Science
ISSN 1365-881 6 print/ISSN 1362-308 7 online © 2001 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810110038924

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 06:34 01 June 2013 388

Guest editorial

species in an already crowded media jungle, speci(cid:142) cally focused on the communica-
tion of geographical information. The fact that GIS communicates geographical
information in digital form merely illustrates its consistency with contemporary
media, which now make widespread use of digital encoding at various stages.

Speci(cid:142) cally, the meaning of ‘GIS as new media’ can be broadly understood at
least in the following dual senses. First, GIS have increasingly become a means to
communicate certain aspects of
the real world to the general public. ESRI
(Environmental Systems Research Institute, Redlands, California) advertises its GIS
software products as a ‘common language’ for speaking about and ‘discovering’ the
world, while Intergraph (Huntsville, Alabama) goes so far as to name its products
‘GeoMedia’. The role of communication is superseding the three traditional concep-
tualizations of GIS noted above (as tools for database management, mapping, and
spatial analysis) because the impacts of GIS are realized only when results are
presented to people on screens or on paper. Thus communication in its broadest
sense must be put at the center when we discuss relationships between GIS and
society—software vendors may have recognized this role of GIS better than many
customers. Although data inventory and database management, automated mapping,
and spatial analysis are still predominant tasks of most GIS projects, the goal of all
GIS operations in the end is to communicate information to an audience in society.
All GIS-related activities serve this (cid:142) nal purpose—to communicate; the rest are
intermediate steps serving primarily as means to communicative ends.

Second, signi(cid:142) cant changes have occurred in the past decade in the part played
by digital geographical
information in people’s lives. Sites such as Mapquest
( http://www.mapquest.com) provide millions of users every day with customized
maps of routes and destinations, and sites such as Terraserver (http://www.
terraserver.com) oŒer digital remote sensing imagery for sale to the general public.
The Weather Channel and local television stations present forecasts that incorporate
geographical information from satellite images, and display maps of forecasts from
advanced computational models (Monmonier 1996). Airline passengers are presented
with dynamic maps of the (cid:143) ight’s progress. Humans have always needed to
communicate geographic information, in describing discoveries, giving directions, or
registering ownership. But recent technological developments appear to have opened
a range of new possibilities. Indeed, with the emergence of digital places and digital
individuals (Curry 1998), we are witnessing not only Arnold Toynbee’s etherization
of history but also the etherization of geography.

The dual trends discussed above are consistent with GIS communities’ growing
interest in spatial multimedia and virtual reality (Camara and Raper 1999). However,
it should be pointed out that the emphasis on the communication aspect of GIS
has its parallels in cartography . Robinson and Petchenik (1975) (cid:142) rst introduced
Shannon’s communication theory to understand the map making process. Bertin
(1978) made further elaborations on the linkages between the theory of communica-
tion and the theory of graphics. Martin (1996) tried to apply the Robinson-Petchenik
communication model of cartography to understand GIS. By reconceptualizing
cartography as a language for communication, Tobler (1979) introduced Chomsky’s
(1957) linguistic theory to develop a ‘transformation theory’ of the cartographic
process. Nyerges (1980 ) further explored Chomsky’s ‘deep structure’ versus ‘surface
structure’ in both the cartographic and GIS contexts. Indeed, the communication
paradigm even dominated the cartographic research literature in the 1970s and the
1980s (MacEachren 1995). The recent literature on the basic issues of geographical

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 06:34 01 June 2013 Guest editorial

389

information science (GISci.) also invoked various linguistic metaphors to study
geographical information processing from the perspectives of communication and
linguistics (Frank and Mark 1991, Goodchild 2000 ).

However all these previous works have engaged us in discussing technically
oriented syntax issues (rules and grammars governing the relationships among signi-
(cid:142) ers); few have touched the complex and problematic semantic issues in GIS (the
relationship between the signi(cid:142) er and the signi(cid:142) ed ). Using communication theorist
James Carey’s words (Carey 1989), all these previous works are dominated by
the ‘transmission view’ of communication at the technical level (how information
is transmitted across space). What is lacking in the current literature is the ‘ritual
view’ of communication (how information is preserved in time) at the cultural and
philosophical levels.

While we applaud Raper’s (2000) recent eŒort to extend GIS in both space and
time from a broad philosophical perspective, reconceptualizing GIS as media opens
some new avenues for future research. As the impacts of media are much better
understood today as a result of years of interdisciplinary research, GIS researchers
can gain new insights on the social implications of GIS through the media perspective.
For example, the tetradic analysis of GIS as media we conducted using McLuhan’s
framework has revealed some interesting hidden messages of GIS which defy their
frequent dichotomous characterization as either good or bad (Sui and Goodchild
2001 ). Instead, GIS transmit a very complex set of messages of simultaneous enhance-
ment, obsolescence, retrieval, and reversal in society. By reconceiving GIS as media,
we can transcend the instrumental rationality currently rampant among both GIS
developers and GIS practitioners and cultivate a more holistic approach to the non-
linear relationships between GIS and society. The clear and present danger is not
GIS or information technologies but our blissful ignorance of the implications of
what they are going to do TO us, because we have concentrated too much on what
GIS can do FOR us (Pickles 1995, Curry 1998). The only sensible way of dealing
with this inherently technological ambivalence is to treat GIS media always as means
to higher social ends.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful for the encouragement by Harvey Miller and Peter Fisher. Helen
Couclelis, Jonathan Phillips, Paul Adams, and Daniel Overton provided critical
comments on an earlier version of this paper. The Varenius project and the Alexandria
Digital Library are supported through cooperative agreements between the
University of California, Santa Barbara, and the US National Science Foundation.

References
Bertin, J., 1978, Theory of communication and theory of the graphic. International Yearbook

Camara, A. S., and Raper, J., editors, 1999, Spatial Multimedia and V irtual Reality (London:

Carey, J. W., 1989, Communication as Culture: Essays on Media and Society (Boston: Unwin

of Cartography, 28, 118–26.

Taylor & Francis).

Hyman).

Chomsky, N., 1957, Syntactic Structures (The Hague: Mouton).
Cowen, D. J., 1994, The importance of GIS for the average person. In Proceedings of First
Federal Geographic T echnology Conference (Washington, DC: National Research
Council ), pp. 7–11.

Curry, M. R., 1998, Digital Places: L iving with Geographic Information T echnologies (London:

Blackwell).

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 06:34 01 June 2013 390

Guest editorial

Frank, A. U., and Mark, D. M., 1991, Language issues for GIS. In Geographical Information
Systems: Principles and Applications, edited by D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild and
D. W. Rhind (Harlow, UK: Longman Scienti(cid:142) c and Technical ), pp. 147–163.
Goodchild, M. F., 2000, Communicating geographic information in a digital age. Annals of

the Association of American Geographers, 90, 344–355.

MacEachren, A. M., 1995, How Maps Work: Representation, V isualization, and Design (New

York: Guilford Press).

(London: Routledge).

Martin, D., 1996, Geographic Information Systems: Socioeconomic Applications, second edition

Monmonier, M., 1996, Electronic weather maps. In T en Geographic Ideas that Changed the
World, edited by S. Hanson (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press), pp. 56–69.
National Research Council (NRC), 1993, T oward a Coordinated Spatial Data Inf rastructure

for the Nation (Washington, DC: National Academy Press).

National Research Council (NRC), 1999, Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information

Resources (Washington, DC: National Academy Press).

Nyerges, T. L., 1980, Modeling the Structure of Cartographic Information for Query
Processing, Unpublished Ph.D dissertation (Columbus: Ohio State University).
Pickles, J., editor, 1995, Ground T ruth: T he Social Implications of Geographic Information

Raper, J., 2000, Multidimensional GIS : Extending GIS in Space and T ime (London: Taylor

Robinson, A. H., and Petchenick, B. B., 1975, The map as a communication system. T he

Sui, D. Z., and Goodchild, M. F., 2001, A tetradic analysis of GIS and society using

McLuhan’s law of the media. Canadian Geographer (forthcoming).

Tobler, W. R., 1979, A transformational view of cartography. T he American Cartographer,

6, 101–106.

Systems (New York: Guildford).

& Francis).

Cartographic Journal, 12, 7–14

Downloaded by [Dalhousie University] at 06:34 01 June 2013 