This article was downloaded by: [Southern Illinois University]
On: 08 November 2014, At: 08:10
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

The role of ontology in improving
gazetteer interaction
K. Janowicz a & C. Keßler a
a Institute for Geoinformatics , University of Münster , Germany
Published online: 19 Aug 2008.

To cite this article: K. Janowicz & C. Keßler (2008) The role of ontology in improving gazetteer
interaction, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22:10, 1129-1157, DOI:
10.1080/13658810701851461

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810701851461

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
Vol. 22, No. 10, October 2008, 1129–1157

Research Article

The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

K. JANOWICZ* and C. KEßLER
Institute for Geoinformatics, University of Mu¨ nster, Germany

(Received 05 December 2007; in final form 07 December 2007 )

Gazetteers are more than basic place name directories containing names and
locations for named geographic places. Most of
them contain additional
information,
including a categorization of gazetteer entries using a typing
scheme. This paper focuses on the nature of these categorization schemes. We
argue that gazetteers can benefit from an ontological approach to typing
schemes, providing a formalization that will better support gazetteer applica-
tions, maintenance, interoperability, and semi-automatic feature annotation. We
discuss the process of developing such an ontology as a modification of an
existing feature type thesaurus; the difficulties in mapping from thesauri to
ontologies are described in detail. To demonstrate the benefits of a categorization
based on ontologies, a new gazetteer Web (and programming) interface is
introduced and the impact on gazetteer interoperability is discussed.

Keywords: Semantic similarity; Ontology; Gazetteer research

1.

Introduction and motivation

Gazetteers are place name directories containing names, spatial references, feature
information for named geographic places. They are key
types and additional
components of all georeferenced information systems,
including geographic
information science applications in many diverse fields of knowledge, Web-based
mapping services, and the emerging Web 2.0. A typical use case for gazetteers is
information retrieval where queries can be based on place names and coordinates.
They are central to the process of geoparsing where references to geographic
locations by place name are recognized in text strings and converted to coordinate
references. Gazetteers are also components of complex reasoning services such as
the identity assumption service for historical places discussed by Janowicz (2006b).
From an information theoretic point of view, a gazetteer is defined as a triple (N, F,
T) where N corresponds to one or more place names, F represents one or more
geographic footprints (i.e. spatial locations) and T is the type of the described
feature (i.e. place) (see Hill 2006). In the context of gazetteers, a feature is a real
world entity. The feature type which is selected from a typing scheme or ontology1 is
used for feature categorization. A named geographic place is an abstract entity
defined to refer to a physical region (extent) in space and categorized (typed)
according to commonly agreed upon characteristics. Place is a social concept of
interest for a particular community during a certain time span. Its name is a symbol
used for communication.

*Corresponding author. Email: janowicz@uni-muenster.de

1 The concepts we specify in ontologies are representations of the concepts in our mind, which should not be confused.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810701851461

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1130

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

Categorization is a central cognitive process. This paper focuses on two reasons
for the categorization of places: communication and cognition. Categorizing into
types improves communication about places with which at least one communication
partner is unfamiliar, for example when giving directions such as ‘follow the path
along the river up to the bridge, then turn right towards the market place’. Moreover,
typing is the key to prediction, reasoning and decision making which all require an
abstraction from entity to type level. What humans experience as a place is, in fact,
the set of perceivable characteristics of the region in space the place refers to by its
type and name (see also Casati and Varzi 1999). This includes the surface and
texture of the physical region of earth, man-made entities such as buildings, and
knowledge obtained from maps, books, and other information sources. Beyond
those perceivable characteristics, places may also be typed by convention, such as
administrative areas. The referenced region (or entity) can also be described in
relation to other regions or entities, such as ‘East Frisia is a coastal region in the
northwest of Lower Saxony’. The definition of place as a mental handle pointing to
real world regions (or entities) is independent of a specific name or an affixed and
stable portion of space. Because the name functions as a symbol for communication,
a particular place can be referred to by various names by different people and in
different ways through time or by placeholders such as ‘Anyshire’. The spatial extent
referred to by the place name may vary over time or be known only in a general
sense. The clear distinction between real world and reference also helps to explain
how places can disappear without causing inconsistency. One can argue that a place
no longer exists when there is no human left who is aware of this place. A place, such
as a temporal Normand settlement, moves when the perceivable characteristics
move (as opposed to the region on the earth’s surface)2.

The partition into names, footprints and types corresponds to the minimum
definition of a gazetteer entry, a subset of the full set of descriptive elements that
includes details such as spatio-temporal history3. The name of a place is called its
textual reference, while the footprint is called the spatial reference. Thus, a gazetteer
supports at least two functions. First, it maps between place names and respective
footprints: NRF; and second, between names and types: NRT. Several online
gazetteer services support queries by place name, footprint, and type via a Web page
or through an application programming interface (API). These access functionalities
are integrated into other online services; for example, to translate a place-name
query into a footprint query to search data sets where only spatial access is
supported. A long term vision of gazetteer research is focusing on the development
of a distributed local-responsibility service infrastructure instead of a single world
gazetteer. Such an infrastructure can be compared to the Domain Name Service
which maps hostnames on the internet to their IP addresses. In such a gazetteer
network, each gazetteer offers lookup for places within its spatial and thematic
scope. If the gazetteer cannot answer a request, it redirects the query to a higher level
gazetteer which decides whether it or another gazetteer can resolve the query. The
underlying idea is that gazetteers should contain and maintain data of interest for
the community running the service. This ensures that the stored data are accurate,
complete, and up-to-date.

2 Finally, this leads to the question of place identity which is out of scope for this paper.
3 For instance, the ADL Gazetteer Content Standard allows for a Time Period Note for names, spatial footprints and
types.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1131

A distributed gazetteer infrastructure raises several challenges for effective cross-
gazetteer access. For example, different names can refer to the same place or to
different places and the spatial footprints may vary from one gazetteer to the other.
Footprints vary because of interpretation or because the boundaries have changed
through time or simply because different types of footprints have been used, such as
point versus polygon representation (see also Jane´e 2006 and Hastings 2008). The
most problematic interoperability issue, however, is the variety of typing schemes
used to categorize gazetteer entries (features). There is no common typing scheme
that can be used for cross-gazetteer access because gazetteers are developed for
different purposes and communities with varying thematic scopes and spatial scales.
For a common feature type specification to be successful, it needs to be generic
enough to form a top level for all gazetteers and extensible to allow for local type
definitions. It also needs to be grounded in widely accepted definitions of common
feature type categories.

In this paper, we argue that the standards-based thesaurus structure (ANSI/NISO
2005) is not a sufficient basis for feature type interoperability among divergent
gazetteers; we review existing feature typing schemes to illustrate this issue. Their
structure also prevents the development of enhanced Web and programming
interfaces. In some cases type-lookup even leads to unexpected results. We propose
the development of a feature type ontology to improve both gazetteer interoper-
ability and reasoning capability based on feature typing. To demonstrate this, our
approach is to take advantage of an existing feature typing scheme – the Alexandria
Digital Library’s (ADL) Feature Type Thesaurus (FTT) – to create a portion of
such an ontology. The steps taken to create such an ontology are discussed. Based
on the proposed ontology an extended gazetteer web interface is introduced. This
interface applies subsumption and similarity based reasoning (Janowicz 2006a, Lutz
and Klien 2006, Janowicz et al. 2007) to improve usability.

This paper consists of two parts. The first part reviews three feature type thesauri,
the Alexandria Digital Gazetteer, the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names and
GeoNames.org4. Section 2 describes the difficulties observed in mapping from
feature type thesauri to an ontology. Then in Section 3, the Web and programming
interfaces of these gazetteers are examined, giving special focus to the type-lookup
functionality. The second part of this paper focuses on the conceptual design and
implementation of a feature type ontology (Section 4), giving examples from
hydrography. Applying this ontology, Section 5 points out how extended gazetteer
interfaces can be implemented using ontology-based reasoning services such as
similarity and subsumption. The implications of the new ontology and interfaces on
gazetteer interoperability are discussed. Finally, Section 6 presents conclusions and
directions of further work.

2. An ontological view on feature type thesauri for gazetteers

In this section we examine three well-known feature typing schemes, how they
compare to an ontological approach, and the issues involved with converting these
schemes – particularly, the thesauri – into an ontology. Such schemes were
developed for particular gazetteer applications and not with conversion to
ontologies in mind. We identify the issues in such a conversion and illustrate the
difficulties of using existing thesauri as the basis of ontologies (van Assem et al.

4 Which is strictly speaking rather a feature type catalog than a thesaurus.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1132

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

2004). A distinction must be made between the thesauri examined here and the
theoretical principles of thesaurus construction as described by the ISO2788 (ISO
1986) and ANSI/NISO Z39.19 (ANSI/NISO 2005) standards. We have not
attempted a comparison of thesaurus construction principles versus ontology
construction principles. Our examination of feature type thesauri focuses on typing
schemes currently in use, the role they play in online gazetteer services, and what
advantages can be realized if ontologies are used instead.

2.1 Thesauri and ontologies

Thesauri are developed for different purposes than ontologies. To highlight the
fundamental differences between thesauri and ontologies, we give a brief overview
here without going into detail (see table 1). According to Gruber (1993),
‘an
ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualization’ used to achieve a shared
and common understanding of a particular domain of interest (see also Guarino
1998, Studer et al. 1998, Sowa 2000). Therefore, an ontology includes specific
characteristics of a concept such that one concept is distinct from another (e.g. that a
river is a flowing body of water) and these characterizations are enforced so that all
subconcepts of River are also flowing bodies of water. Structurally, an ontology has
an unlimited set of relationships, one of which is the is-a hierarchical relationship.
Thesauri are defined as controlled vocabularies with a fixed number of
relationships. These relationships are hierarchical, associative, and equivalency.
The hierarchical relationships can be further specified as being generic (is-a),
partitive (whole-part), or instance (describing the relation between an instance and
its type). Thesaurus standards allow multiple hierarchies (i.e. a concept can occur in
more than one hierarchical tree), but most thesauri use a single inheritance hierarchy
to simplify maintenance and the display of the relationships. The associative
relationships point to similarities between concepts that are not related hierarchi-
cally. Equivalency is used to introduce alternative terms that are used to describe the
concept or a concept that is semantically equivalent within the scope of the
particular thesaurus. This is why a thesaurus is called a controlled vocabulary. One
term (the preferred term) is chosen to represent a concept while other possible terms
(non-preferred terms) are entered as equivalent terms. These alternative terms are
not part of the controlled vocabulary but are considered to be lead-in terms which
lead to the appropriate controlled vocabulary term. In contrast to ontologies,
thesauri do not have specific characterizations of the concepts that constrain the
establishment of relationships. Thesaurus construction is guided by international
guidelines but individual thesauri may not rigorously follow these principles.
Thesaurus entries can also have textual notes to explain their intended scope,
provide an informal concept definition, or document when the term was added to

Table 1. Thesaurus versus ontology.

Aspect

Thesaurus

Ontology

Information retrieval and structuring Inference and reasoning, information retrieval
generic, whole-part or instance hierarchy Is-a hierarchy

Purpose
Order
Relations Restricted number of relations
About
Semantics No formal semantics

Terms representing concepts

Arbitrary number of relations
Specifications of concepts
Formal semantics

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1133

Table 2. Labels for relationships and descriptive notes.

Relationship or descriptive note

Use/used For
Broader term/narrower term
-
generic
- partitive
instance
-
Related term
Scope note
Definition
History note

Label

USE/UF
BT/NT
BTG/NTG
BTP/NTP
BTI/NTI
RT
SN
DF
HN

the thesaurus. For the display of thesaurus structures, there are commonly used
notations for the relationships; these are shown in table 2.

The hierarchical relations are shared by ontologies and thesauri. The instance and
whole-part relationships in thesauri can also be expressed in ontologies; the instance
relationship corresponds to the ontological instance-of relationship. The whole-part
relationship has no specific pre-defined counterpart but can be modeled as binary
relation (see also Bittner et al. 2004). The associative relations in thesauri are not
defined in any way that is transferable to ontologies (although the most recent
thesaurus standards present common subtypes of associations). Instead, ontologies
define the type of association explicitly, which allows for additional reasoning
capabilities. Since the non-preferred terms of the equivalency relationship are not part
of the controlled vocabulary, there is no direct correlation to their role in ontologies,
however in some cases they can be thought of as so-called equivalence classes.

Summing up, one can characterize the increasing expressivity from a pure
taxonomy over a thesaurus up to an ontology as follows: while a taxonomy only
groups terms using the generic relationship, a thesaurus also supports partonomy,
instance-class relations, non-hierarchical associations between preferred terms, and
adds non-preferred terms
to terminology by alternative
expressions. An ontology explicitly defines all concepts and relations so that the
intended scope (i.e. range and domain) and the logical implications of the relations
can be validated and used for reasoning services.

to provide access

For reasons of readability and influenced by Smith (2006), we categorize the
difficulties in mapping from feature type thesauri to ontologies into three groups.
However, most of them can be regarded as special cases of implicit or missing formal
semantics.

2.2 Representation versus representation language

From an ontological point of view, feature type thesauri have no clear distinction
between the representation of features as real world phenomena and the usage of
representing symbols in the gazetteer application workflow. While some relations
link features of given types to each other, other relations apply to the symbols
features
themselves. For instance, hierarchical relations are relations about
(respectively entities) and can therefore be mapped to an is-a hierarchy within an
ontology as long as the hierarchy is based on the generic relationship (BTG/NTG).
In contrast, the equivalence relation cannot be mapped in this way because it holds
neither between entities of the related types nor between the types themselves (as
non-preferred terms are not defined types). Instead, it is a relation between concepts

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1134

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

and lexical terms used to direct the user to the preferred terms. The same argument
holds for relations specifying alternative (e.g. foreign) names for feature types or
node labels.

2.3 Ambiguous relationships

Examining feature typing schemes, we found that relationships, such as the generic
hierarchical relation, are used in different ways by thesauri and sometimes even
within the same thesaurus. When partitive relationships are used for geographic
places, for example to show that Berlin is part of Germany, the ontology conversion
process should map this to contained/contains relations holding between entities of
certain geographic feature types (such as between City and Country). However, it is
not possible to do this automatically if both generic and partitive relations are used
within the same thesaurus without identification (i.e. BT/NT is used for BTG/NTG
and BTP/NTP). In other words, hierarchical relations in thesauri are not necessarily
generalization relations as known from ontologies but could also represent
partonomical or instance based hierarchies (see table 1). Additionally, from an
ontological point of view, a distinction between partonomy (in an administrative
sense) and spatial containment is required (see also Winston et al. 1987), while the
partitive relationship is used in thesauri for both cases.

As discussed in Section 2, in several cases association or equivalence relationships
are used to indicate proximity. This should be part of the search and annotation
framework, but not part of the feature type representation itself. In this work, we
will use semantic similarity measures to represent proximity. In terms of ontology,
the association relation needs to be replaced by concrete relations holding between
given types respectively their entities (e.g. via the domain and range specified for a
certain relation).

2.4 Non-formal language semantics

Most difficulties in mapping from feature type thesauri to ontologies are caused by a
lack of formal semantics and language expressivity issues in thesauri. As pointed out
in Section 2.1, generic hierarchical relations are defined less strictly than sub and
super class relationships in ontology engineering. An example is the concept
hydrographic structures in the ADL FTT. Hydrographic structures are defined as
‘constructed bodies of water’. The subconcept canals fits this definition, while the
subconcept offshore platforms does not. Consequently, searching for hydrographic
structures using the ADL Gazetteer Webclient also returns offshore platforms (which
is not a body of water). While this also points to a mixture of feature and workflow
representation (see Section 2.2), it shows that a formal definition (which allows for
automated consistency checking) of the used relations is necessary. The same
argument holds for the grouping of feature types in the GeoNames.org typing
scheme. From an ontological point of view, a first step would be to examine whether
hierarchical relations used within a geographic feature type thesaurus are used in a
consistent way and whether they are generic, partitive or individual based relations.
In addition to relationships, difficulties arise for feature types themselves. In
thesauri, terms are organized as a controlled vocabulary without a formal definition.
Their meaning is determined by their hierarchical position within the thesaurus, by
their textual definition (if present), and especially by the sets of instances linked to
them, i.e. extensionally. Interpretation of terms also varies from one thesaurus to the

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1135

other. For example, in the ADL FTT, the term countries is defined as ‘[t]erritory
occupied by a large group of people organized under a single, usually independent
government, and recognized as a country internationally’. The non-preferred term
nations is specified as an equivalent term. The Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names
(TGN), in contrast, gives preference to nations and reserves the term countries for rare
situations such as the divisions of the United Kingdom (e.g. Scotland, Britain, etc.).
Consequently, the ADL Gazetteer lists 165 countries while the TGN only lists 11. The
Getty typing scheme is in fact an extended version of the Art and Architecture
Thesaurus, which defines nations as the preferred term for countries. However, this
seems to contradict the results obtained by type-lookup. The point is not that
conceptualizations may differ, but the lack of a formal definition which would allow to
distinguish both concepts without knowing their instances, i.e. intentionally.

2.5 Conclusions

The difficulties examined in mapping from feature type thesauri to ontologies lead to
the following assertions: first, because the relationships in thesauri are not explicitly
defined, existing feature typing schemes can be converted to ontologies only through
a process that includes validation of the relationships as required by ontologies.
Second, in several cases these relations are not sufficient to disambiguate concepts,
so that textual definitions and instances have to be taken into account. For the same
reasons, the type-lookup operation defined as one of the two core functionalities of a
gazetteer often returns counter intuitive results. The following section describes the
type-lookup functionality of the examined gazetteers in more detail.

3. Gazetteer communication paradigm

Gazetteer services are the reason for creating feature type descriptions in the first
place. Accordingly, a feature type ontology must provide optimal support for the
type-look functionality of gazetteer services. For this purpose, it is useful to analyze
the functionality and shortcomings of current gazetteer services. Communication
with gazetteers is based on two different paradigms: Web interfaces provide access to
the gazetteer functionality for users, whereas APIs allow other services and
applications to query the gazetteer. The ADL Gazetteer web interface and API, the
Getty TGN web interface and the GeoNames web interface and API are used to
show different approaches
these communication
paradigms, using the feature types Canal and Channel.

to the implementation of

3.1 Use case: Canal and Channel

To demonstrate the feature type interoperability problems of current gazetteer
services and our proposed approach to overcoming them, we will use the feature
types Canal and Channel as test feature types. These two feature types were chosen
because they are especially suitable to demonstrate the challenges in the description
of such types. Canals and channels are related to each other and they can easily be
confused. The exact meanings of the words are ambiguous and differ slightly,
depending on the source of the definition. For example, the WordNet definition of
canal is a ‘long and narrow strip of water made for boats or for irrigation’, whereas
the WikiPedia definition is ‘a manmade water channel’. The definitions for channel
are ‘a deep and relatively narrow body of water’ (WordNet) and ‘a narrow, enclosed
around the sides, deep, waterway connecting two bodies of water’ (WikiPedia).

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1136

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

There is agreement that a canal is a constructed feature and a channel is a natural
feature but other details of the character and function of these feature types differ.
Moreover, both terms can appear in different contexts. For example, a canal can be
regarded as a route of transport navigable by ships, as an artifact, or as a hydrographic
feature. Ideally, a general, multi-purpose feature type definition should account for all
of these aspects. These feature types serve as good examples for how ontologies can be
used to disambiguate related concepts. The problems shown by means of these
examples repeatedly appear when building a feature type hierarchy.

3.2 Web interface

The Web interfaces presented here provide access to the gazetteer data for users, i.e.
human agents as opposed to artificial agents such as applications or services.
Accordingly, visitors of such Web interfaces are shown a form which allows them to
enter a query. Experienced Web users can be expected to be familiar with filling in
HTML forms. Nonetheless, the different levels of complexity and partly ambiguous
semantics of the used terminology can be confusing for gazetteer Web interface
users, as will be shown in the following.

3.2.1 Alexandria Digital Library Gazetteer Server Client. The ADL Gazetteer
Server Client5 is a Web interface consisting of an interactive map and an HTML
form, as shown in figure 1(a). The map allows the user to specify the region of the
earth to include in the query; that is, the query is looking for named geographic
places within or overlapping the region shown in the map. The map region is changed
by zooming and panning to the desired location and extent. The query string for
place name can be typed in and the search function can be refined using operators
such as has any words, has all words, etc. The form also allows for a temporal
constraint by selecting a place status, which can be current, former or proposed.
Finally, if the ADL Gazetteer identification code of a specific gazetteer entry is
known to the user, it can be directly entered into the appropriate form field.

Most interesting in the context of this paper is the client’s functionality that allows
the user to restrict the query to a specific feature type by selecting it from a
predefined list. This list is based on the ADL FTT6. At the top of the list are FTT’s
top level categories that can be selected for broad, general searches by type; below
this, the complete hierarchical list of feature types is displayed. There are over 200
selectable feature types, organized in six top-level categories. The exact definitions of
the feature types can be looked up by following a link to the ADL FTT Web page.
Users can also consult the FTT if the feature type they are looking for is not on the
list. This is the case if a user is looking for a non-preferred term for a feature type, as
the form lists only preferred terms. For example, the term irrigation systems is not
listed, but this term can be found in the FTT with the direction to USE canals
instead. That is, gazetteer features that are instances of irrigation systems can be
found by using the feature type canals, which is grouped under hydrographic
structures, and falls into the class of manmade features. Although this classification
is correct in principle, a user might wonder why canals cannot be found under
hydrographic features (which is due to the single inheritance approach underlying the
ADL FTT). A search by feature type in the ADL Gazetteer is automatically

5 http://webclient.alexandria.ucsb.edu/client/gaz/adl/index.jsp
6 http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/gazetteer/FeatureTypes/ver070302/index.htm

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1137

Figure 1. Overview of the ADL Gazetteer Web interface: (a) query form with map, (b) list
of query results and (c) detail view for a single feature.

expanded to all sub-terms of the type entered in the query. That is, if hydrographic
features are part of the query then the query results will include not only features
classified with that term but also all features classified with any of the sub-terms of
hydrographic features.

The presentation of the query results consists of a numbered list, with the
corresponding numbers shown at the features’ locations on the map (see figure 1(b)).
Additionally, the query that has been produced from the user’s form input is
provided. Clicking one of the results opens a detailed description for this feature (see
figure 1(c)), containing the feature’s name and class, its footprint (including an
overview map) and related information such as part-of relationships.

3.2.2 Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names. The Web interface for the Getty
TGN7 only has three input fields: the name of the place the user is looking for, its
place type (corresponding to ADL’s feature types) and nation, as shown in
figure 2(a). The user can choose from a list of all place types (figure 2(b)) and a list of
all nations via links next to the corresponding form fields. Although the hiearchy of
geographic names (figure 2(c)) is available, a corresponding link for the place types
is missing. Users have to visit the About the TGN page to find out about the place

7 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/tgn/

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1138

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

Figure 2. Overview of the Getty Web interface: (a) query form, (b) place type list, (c) place
name hierarchy and (d) place type hierarchy as provided by the Art and Architecture Thesaurus.

type hierarchy. Here it is explained that the typing scheme for the TGN is based on
the place type hierarchy developed for the Art and Architecture Thesaurus8 (AAT).
Figure 2(d) shows the AAT place type hierarchy for canal.

Note that the TGN Web interface does not support searching for places within a
user-defined map extent. The only spatial restriction that is possible through the
query form is the selection of a nation. This is because the Getty TGN is a gazetteer
structured as a thesaurus with part-whole hierarchy (e.g. California part-of United
States) and, although spatial coordinates are available for many of the entries,
coordinates are not present for all entries. After submitting a query, a list of results
is presented to the user (see figure 3(a)), comparable to the one provided by the ADL
Gazetteer. Every result is linked to detailed information on that place, containing an
ID, geographic coordinates and the place’s name(s) and type (see figure 3(b)).
Additionally, the hierarchical position in the TGN is shown, and the original
sources for the presented data are listed.

3.2.3 GeoNames. The GeoNames9 service provides two different Web interfaces.
The basic interface only consists of an input field for location name and a drop-
down menu for country selection, so we focus on the advanced search interface here

8 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/aat/
9 http://www.geonames.org/

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1139

Figure 3.
opens the detailed description of the place.

(a) Getty presents the matching results for a query as a list. (b) Clicking a result

Figure 4. Overview of the GeoNames Web interface: (a) advanced search form, (b) feature
class drop-down list, (c) list view of query results, (d) map view of query results and (e) extract
from the feature codes classification.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1140

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

(figure 4(a)). In addition to the form fields available in the basic version, it allows for
the restriction of a query to a group of feature types and to a specific continent. The
user can activate fuzzy search through a checkbox. Unfortunately, this option is not
explained and thus remains unclear to the user.

Compared to the lengthy sets of feature types provided by the ADL and TGN
Web interfaces, GeoNames has a very short list with only nine feature classes
available for selection. Note that this list is not structured as a thesaurus; it is a
simple list. Each feature class represents a group of feature types (figure 4(b)). The
classes are broadly defined by one to three typical feature types, but users can only
guess what other feature types might be included in a particular class. The
classification used for this list is (comparable to Getty) found in a different section10
of the GeoNames Web site, which is only accessible through the sitemap and the
‘frequently asked questions’ in the forum. The complete list of codes (see figure 4(e)
for an extract) is a slightly extended version of the feature codes introduced by the
United States National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). Users who do not
know this classification will have difficulties selecting the appropriate feature class
for their query, especially because the classification is partly counter intuitive (e.g.
the feature types continent and military base are classified under ‘parks, area …’; see
also the ‘stream, lake, …’ group in figure 4(e)).

The query results in GeoNames can be displayed in two ways: either as a list
(figure 4(c)), or on a map with markers for the query results (figure 4(d)). Clicking a
result gives different information at a different level of detail in each of the two
result displays. In the map view, the result markers are linked to pop-ups, which
contain the feature’s spatial containment hierarchy, geographic coordinates, links to
WikiPedia entries and RDF files, etc. In the list view, the results are linked to a
detailed view that shows a map with all features that are spatially contained in the
corresponding feature. This is not made clear in the query form, (i.e. the user will
probably expect the same information, only differing in visualization, when they
click either ‘search’ or ‘show on map’).

3.3 Application programming interface

Application programming interfaces are code interfaces (as opposed to the visual
interfaces discussed in the previous section), which make a program’s functionality
available for developers, who can access it from their code. The number of publicly
available APIs for Web services has grown remarkably recently, as more and more
companies grant developers access to the their services and data. Well-known
examples include Google Maps11, the social events calendar Upcoming.org12 or the
Flickr photo service13. An impressive number of so-called mashups has been created
combining APIs to form complex and (at least in some cases) very useful services. In
addition to such proprietary APIs, there are also efforts for standardized open APIs,
mostly driven by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for the geospatial
domain. Apart from the well-established Web Map Service (WMS) and Web
Feature Service (WFS) specifications and activities in various other areas of
geospatial service standardization, OGC has also addressed gazetteer functionality

10 http://www.geonames.org/export/codes.html
11 http://www.google.com/apis/maps/
12 http://upcoming.org/services/api/
13 http://www.flickr.com/services/api/

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1141

as a special WFS profile (Fitzke 2006). It is based on the abstract data model for
gazetteers described in the ISO 19112 standard ‘Spatial referencing by geographic
identifiers’ (ISO 2003). However, the OGC WFS gazetteer profile has not yet
reached specification status. Looking at the three gazetteers in the focus of this
section, APIs are available for GeoNames and the ADL Gazetteer; there was no
public API available for Getty at the time this paper was being written.

3.3.1 GeoNames Web Services. GeoNames provides a number of Web services, such
as for GeoNames search14, geocoding15, inverse geocoding in various flavors16 and
access to the GeoNames geographic places ontology17. The services are realized in
different ways, which are all based on the HTTP protocol. Parameters for the queries
are either encoded as part of the URL in GET requests, returning the results in different
formats, or they act as Web services (Fielding 2000). All of these services provide only
different means for accessing and searching the gazetteer data. The results are given in
different formats, but they do not support any further functionality on type level.

3.3.2 Alexandria Digital Library Gazetteer Protocol. The API for the ADL
Gazetteer is based on the ADL Gazetteer Protocol, which is also used by the ADL
Gazetteer Server Client for communication. The protocol defines three independent
HTTP-based services: get capabilities, query and download. Unlike the GeoNames
services, the requests are encoded as XML files that are sent to the service via
HTTP-POST (‘XML-over-HTTP’). All requests to the service, as well as the
resulting responses, must adhere to the XML schema developed for this purpose18.
The get capabilities service allows clients to access the gazetteer metadata, i.e. it
provides information on the functionality provided such as supported query operators
and available thesauri. The query and download services provide access to the actual
gazetteer entries. The former allows for selection of entries by a query in the gazetteer
query language, whereas the latter returns all entries. In both cases, clients can request
either standard or extended reports. The standard report format is part of the ADL
Gazetteer protocol and contains the elements identifier, codes, place-status, names,
footprints, classes, relationships, display-name and bounding-box; footprints are encoded
in Geography Markup Language (GML). As the information provided by a specific
gazetteer usually exceeds the elements of the standard report, the extended report
allows gazetteer providers to specify their own report format. Extended report formats
must be defined as XML schemas. Clients can utilize the extended reports by
downloading those schemas, which are linked in the capabilities documents.

3.4 Functional comparison

While the core gazetteer functionalities are provided by all three gazetteers under
consideration, the services differ in detail (see table 3 for an overview). The available
functions focus on place names, coordinates, and administrative hierarchies and
require improvement for enhanced functionality regarding feature type searching.
From a user’s point of view, access to a gazetteer via a Web interface should present

14 http://www.geonames.org/export/geonames-search.html
15 http://www.geonames.org/export/free-geocoding.html
16 http://www.geonames.org/export/reverse-geocoding.html
17 http://www.geonames.org/ontology/; The GeoNames ontology contains concrete places that are interlinked with
each other via the contains, neighbours and nearby relationships, as opposed to the ontology on type level proposed in
this paper.
18 http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/gazetteer/protocol/gazetteer-service.xsd

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1142

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

Table 3. Comparison of the functionalities of the three gazetteers under consideration.

ADL

Getty

GeoNames

Web interface functionality
Place name search
Place type restriction
Spatial restriction by nation
Spatial restriction by continent
Spatial restriction via map extent
Temporal restriction
Feature type description lookup
Visualization of results on map
API functionality
Capabilities descriptions
Query by place type
Geocoding
Inverse geocoding
Query by spatial containment
Place status query
Query by relationship (instance level)
Query for neighbors / nearby features

1Indirectly via map extent.
2Indirectly via nation selection.
3Not directly accessible from the Web interface.

!
!
!1
!1
!
!
!
!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
–

!
!
!
!2
–
–
!3
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

!
!
–
!
–
–
!3
!

–
!
!
!
!
–
–
!

the available data in a structured way that allows for easy exploration and intuitive
query building. To achieve this, it is essential that the user has a clear understanding
of the feature types used by the gazetteer. As shown above, some of the Web
interfaces make accessing the underlying feature type definitions difficult. However,
this is not only a user interface issue. We propose that a unifying feature type
ontology will alleviate some of the inconsistencies and limitations of existing feature
typing schemes, support more effective feature type searching across gazetteers, and
consequently support more intuitive Web and API interfaces.

To enable automatic integration of and access to different gazetteers, distinct
formal definitions of at least a core set of the feature types are required. In the
following sections, we explain our approach for a feature type ontology and
demonstrate how both Web interfaces and APIs can benefit from such an ontology.

4. Development of a feature type ontology

In Sections 2 and 3 we argued that feature type thesauri do not provide optimal
support for type-lookup functionality. We chose to use the ADL FTT as the source
of terminology and structure to populate our experimental feature type ontology.
This section describes the steps of the process using the methodology introduced by
van Assem et al. (2004) and Hepp (2006). We also distinguish between conceptual
design decisions and the actual representation in DL. As the definition of all
concepts forming the ADL thesaurus is out of scope for this article, the concepts
Canal and Channel will be used as examples to demonstrate our approach.

4.1 Conceptual design

This section describes the conceptual design of the feature type ontology without
going into detail about the implementation. The questions to be answered here focus

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1143

on aspects such as the chosen level of abstraction (generalization) and the purpose for
which the ontology is developed. While the feature type ontology should describe the
nature of real world entities, an ontology is always developed for a specific purpose.
Taking Guarino’s (1998) distinction into top-level, domain and application ontologies
as well as Uschold’s (2000) notion of global and local ontologies into account, we
consider the feature type ontology to be a (global) domain ontology. Hence the
purpose is to specify concepts on a level of abstraction that is generic enough to be
used and further refined by multiple gazetteers, but also detailed enough to be directly
applicable for type-lookup. Each gazetteer can then add complementary sub concepts
to this domain ontology, i.e. feature types to describe its own perspective within an
application ontology, while the domain ontology provides the shared (and formal)
vocabulary necessary to perform type lookups spanning over multiple gazetteers.

van Assem et al. (2004) describe a method to convert thesauri into RDF and
OWL ontologies to make existing, agreed-upon community knowledge available for
use in the Semantic Web. The transformation methodology is structured into four
steps, namely preparation, syntactic conversion, semantic conversion and standardiza-
tion, and contains hands-on guidelines for each step (such as ‘preserve original
naming as much as possible’ or ‘avoid redundant information’). According to the
syntactic conversion process described by van Assem et al. (2004), the proposed
feature type ontology should preserve the structure and naming of the original
thesaurus. To achieve this, the terms defined by the ADL FTT are reused as follows:

(D1) Both preferred and non-preferred terms are converted to concepts (i.e. feature
types) in an ontology. To preserve the structure of the FTT, concepts
stemming from non-preferred terms are either sub classes or equivalent classes
of already defined concepts (e.g. previously specified as preferred terms). We
do not claim that all these concepts should be part of a global feature type
ontology but can be specified as additional concepts by local gazetteers. This
should be the case if a particular type is not of general interest or cannot be
clearly separated from other domain level concepts. If a non-preferred term is
only a spelling variant, it should neither be part of the global ontology
discussed here, nor any local ontology. Such variants can be used as
alternative names on application level to improve the gazetteer interface, i.e. to
make the underlying ontology more accessible for a particular group of users.
(D2) If a scope note contains more than one definition and some of those
definitions contradict (in terms of inheritance), new concepts are introduced
for these definitions. New concepts are named using one of the terms formally
entered as alternative terminology (e.g. equivalent terms), if possible.
(D3) If new concepts have to be introduced or existing ones are renamed,
additional feature type thesauri (or catalogs) are taken into account. This
includes the Getty TGN typing scheme and GeoNames.org typing scheme,
but also WordNet to ensure that the used terms also reflect the intended
common understanding of end users.

(D4) As feature types are formal specifications of concepts (in our minds), all
feature types are named in singular form. This is also a common convention
for ontologies.

Regarding the semantic conversion proposed by van Assem et al. (2004), the implicit
semantics of a thesaurus has to be made explicit and interpreted in terms of the new
representation format. In case of the ADL FTT, one has to decide whether the generic

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1144

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

hierarchical relationships should be kept and represented with classical subsumption
(is-a) relations or represented in the ontology with a different set of relationships.
Unlike several other thesauri, ADL does not use taxonomic relations for partonomic
relationships (see Section 2.3), therefore it is possible to create an is-a hierarchy based
on BT and NT. This conversion cannot be done automatically. For each type it must
be checked whether all types formally related via NT or BT are sub classes (respectively
super classes) as defined in Section 2.2. As subsumption is transitive, the process needs
to be repeated for all Narrower Term and respectively Broader Term relations.
Moreover, while the ADL thesaurus is specified as a single inheritance hierarchy, the
proposed ontology makes use of multiple inheritance. This leads to changes within the
hierarchy and to new concepts that are handled according to D1–D4.

The ADL FTT has six top terms; all terms in the thesaurus are sub-terms of one of
these terms. The feature type ontology has a common super type called feature,
indicating that all instances of further specified subtypes are (geographic) features19.
Alexandria Digital Library uses the top term hydrographic features for all natural
bodies of water (e.g. channels, rivers), while constructed bodies of water (e.g. canals,
reservoirs) are hydrographic structures, which is a sub type of the top term manmade
features. This distinction is imposed by the single inheritance structure of ADL and
the split between natural and constructed features at the top level of terms. However,
from an ontological perspective as well as from a cognitive (i.e. user centered) point of
view, this causes several difficulties. First of all, applying similarity or subsumption
based information retrieval (Janowicz 2006a, Lutz and Klien 2006) leads to
unsatisfying results. Based on the FTT feature type definitions, lakes and reservoirs
do not share a common more general term; the relationship between them is expressed
as an associative relation (i.e. the reciprocal relationship of lakes SEE ALSO
reservoirs). Second, users of a gazetteer service are often not aware of whether a
certain body of water was created by humans or not. Many hydrographic features are
influenced by humans to some degree, making it hard to distinguish between natural
and artificial. It should be noted that since the associative relationship is present
between lakes and reservoirs, it is possible in a user interface to prompt the user to
search by both terms when either of them is entered as a search term, but this does not
help with conversion to an ontology because the associative relationships in thesauri
are not formally defined. Additionally, in other cases such usage of the associative
relationship may be misleading. For instance, in the ADL FTT canals has tunnels as
related term, while it is unlikely that a user searching for canals is interested in tunnels.
Similar arguments can be applied to the FTT term transportation features which is
defined as a sub-term of manmade features. The difficulties arising here become clear
if one regards what FTT includes as subterms of transportation features. For
example, if aqueducts, roadways and parking sites are transportation features, why
are canals not (they are connected via an associative relationship)? From an
ontological point of view, one may argue that transportation is a Thematic Role
(Sowa 2000) or affordance (Gibson 1977) which instances of a certain type may
play, and not a feature type itself. Besides problems concerning available
representation languages (Kuhn 2007), this kind of modeling would require the
definition of transportation devices (and even entities to be transported) for every
transportation feature. For the feature type ontology proposed in this paper, we

19 The ADL FTT also has an abstract common super type for the top terms; however, it is neither shown in the Web
interface nor specified in the thesaurus.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1145

Figure 5. Extract of the feature type ontology in Prote´ge´.

decide to keep the transportation features type as part of our multiple hierarchy. We
use the concept TransportationFeature in three ways. First, feature types classifying
entities that were explicitly built for the purpose of transportation are defined as
subtypes of TransportationFeature (e.g. Canal). Second, gazetteers adopting the
feature type ontology can specify additional subtypes as intersections of the further
distinguished type and TransportationFeature (see figure 5). A local gazetteer, for
example, may refine the River type by introducing a subtype for rivers that are
important waterways within a specific region (such as the Dutch Grachten). Third, if
a feature of a given type is mostly used for transportation, it can be additionally
typed using a subclass of TransportationFeature. For instance the river Rhine is one
of the most important waterways in Europe and could be annotated as River and
TransportationFeature. The same approach discussed here for transportation features
is also applied to transform the FTT type manmade features into ManmadeFeature.
Lastly, this paragraph gives a brief insight into how additional relations can
improve the feature type description and support more complex queries. As an
example for topological relations, we discuss hasOrigin and hasDestination here. The
relations hold between ‘linear bodies of water flowing on the earth’s surface’ (ADL
FTT), but can be further generalized. We assume that streams and all subtypes (e.g.
rivers) have an origin (usually a spring) and a destination which might be another

20 Note that this is a simplification pointing to some interesting ontological questions which cannot be discussed here
for lack of space. For instance, rivers can also end in sinkholes (in ADL the top term physiographic features should be
used instead).To specify sinkholes as feature types is difficult especially if the river slowly trickles away and no crisp
border can be defined. To point out a possible solution we defined Inlet (a (narrow) watercourse extending into the
land) as having an origin (a Lake or Sea) but without specifying a destination. Hence, one could specify destinations for
individual inlets (or subtypes), but it is not mandatory for the type Inlet.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1146

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

stream or waterbody20. While it is characteristic for streams (e.g. rivers) to have a
flowing direction (which influences our way of thinking and interacting with
streams), this is not the case for channels and canals. Both connect two or more
hydrographic features without a pre-given (flowing) direction (see figure 5; one
could also use the more general hasConnection relation). In most examined thesauri,
Channel either denotes ‘[relatively] narrow seas or stretches of water between two
close landmasses and connecting two larger bodies of water [or deeper] parts of a
moving body of water (as bays, estuaries, or straits) through which the main current
flows or which affords the best passage through an area otherwise too shallow to
navigate’. (ADL FTT). According to D2 and D3, we use the first part of the
definition here and leave navigation channels aside. While canals are man-made
features built for transportation, channels are not.

The ADL Gazetteer and the ADL FTT are independent entities; they are related
only because the classification of features (e.g. gazetteer entries) in the Gazetteer
are selected from the FTT. The ADL Gazetteer Content Standard (GCS) (Hill et al.
1999) on which the ADL Gazetteer structure is based allows the establishment of
relationships between gazetteer entries. The existing ADL Gazetteer has
implemented only one relationship type: the part-of relation between features.
This is an administrative part-of relationship, not a spatial one, although an
administrative relationship infers spatial containment in many cases. In the ADL
FTT, there are no feature instances and thus there is no need for a part-of
relationship. In our ontology, we propose a spatial containment relation (Winston
et al. 1987) on feature type level to model facts such as that a capital is located
within the borders of a country or that a lake (as inland water body) is surrounded
by landmass.

4.2 Description logic (DL)-based representation

While Section 4.1 describes general design decisions, this section gives brief insight
into the implementation of the feature type ontology21. We have chosen the
SHOI N description logic (DL) as representation language. SHOI N corresponds
to the Web Ontology Language (OWL-DL) which is a well established standard
defined by the W3 Consortium. Web Ontology Language is used by most popular
ontology editors (e.g. Prote´ge´), and most DL-reasoners (e.g. Fact + + ) support
subsumption reasoning for OWL-DL. Moreover, there are several theories and
prototypical implementations such as the SIM-DL similarity server (Janowicz et al.
2007) which support similarity measurement for expressive description logics. In
other words, there is a ready-to-use infrastructure at hand to integrate the proposed
ontology into existing gazetteers.

A discussion of the SHOI N description logic is out of scope for this paper; see
Horrocks et al. (2003) and Baader et al. (2003) for detailed information on its
semantics and application. The only aspect that needs to be kept in mind here is that
the formal semantics underlying SHOI N maps to set theory.

Figure 5 shows an extract of the proposed feature type ontology displayed in the
Prote´ge´ ontology editor. As an example, we will have a closer look at the concrete
implementation of the feature types Canal and Channel. Both are specified as
subtypes of Watercourse, which again is a subtype of InlandWaterBody. Formally,
Canal is defined as

21 The ontology is under development, updated versions are available at http://sim-dl.sourceforge.net/downloads/.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1147

Canal:ManmadeFeature y TransportationFeature y Watercourse y

ð

V hasDestination HydrographicFeature

Þ y § hasDestination 2

ð

Þ

while Channel is specified as follows:

Channel:Watercourse y :ManmadeFeature y

ð

V hasDestination HydrographicFeature

Þ y § hasDestination 2

ð

Þ

Both canals and channels have at least two connections to other hydrographic
features (such as lakes, rivers or even seas). In contrast to Canal, Channel is explicitly
defined as not being man-made. Consequently, while some feature may be specified
as a Channel used for
transportation, nothing can be a Channel and a
ManmadeFeature at the same time. In our definitions we refer to channel as natural
connection between waterbodies, not to navigation channel or river bed. One could
also omit – ManmadeFeature and argue that Channel is a supertype of Canal, which
is not done here. The implications of such design decisions regarding subsumption
and similarity reasoning are discussed in Section 5.

Note that the type Harbor in figure 5 was defined as man-made hydrographic
feature. This was done with respect to D1–D4 and the scope note (‘Sheltered areas
of water where ships or other watercraft can anchor or dock.’) from the FTT. From
another point of view, a harbor (respectively port) can be further distinguished into
its basin, docks, piers, etc. which are not necessarily hydrographic features. While
this may be reasonable for application ontologies refining the presented ontology,
one has to keep in mind that this definition would require to create individual
features of type Basin, Dock, etc. to define a harbor.

5. Subsumption and similarity-based reasoning

In the previous section, we discussed the steps that are required to create a feature
type ontology starting with the ADL FTT. Since this process is bound to a
significant effort, the benefits of a feature type ontology must be pointed out to
justify the cost involved. This section describes how the proposed feature type
ontology can be integrated into the gazetteer communication paradigm. Starting
with a brief insight into similarity and subsumption based information retrieval, the
extended type-lookup functionality will be discussed by introducing a prototypical
Web interface and pointing out possible extensions to the ADL Gazetteer Protocol.

5.1 Subsumption and similarity based information retrieval

The notion of similarity originated in psychology and was established to determine
why and how entities are grouped to categories, and why some categories are
comparable to each other while others are not (Medin et al. 1993, Goldstone and
Son 2005). The main challenge with respect to semantic similarity measurement is
the comparison of meanings. A language has to be specified to express the nature of
entities and metrics are needed to determine how (conceptually) close the compared
entities are. While entities can be expressed in terms of attributes, the representation
of types is more complex. Depending on the expressiveness of the representation
language, types are specified as sets of features, dimensions in a multidimensional
space, or formal restrictions specified on sets using various kinds of description
logics. While some representation languages have an underlying formal semantics

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1148

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

(e.g. model theory), the grounding of several representation languages remains on
the level of an informal description. Because similarity is measured between types
which are representations of concepts in human minds, similarity depends on what is
said (in terms of computational representation) about compared types. This is again
connected to the chosen representation language, leading to the fact that most
similarity measures cannot be compared. Besides the question of representation,
context is another major challenge for similarity assessments. In many cases,
meaningful notions of similarity cannot be determined without defining in respect to
what similarity is measured (Goodman 1972, Medin et al. 1993).

Similarity has been widely applied within GIScience for the past few years. Based
on Tversky’s feature model (1977), Rodriguez and Egenhofer (2004) developed an
extended model called matching distance similarity measure (MDSM) that supports
a basic context theory, automatically determined weights, and asymmetry. Raubal
(2004) utilized conceptual spaces (Ga¨ rdenfors 2000) to implement models based on
distance measures within geometric space. The SIM-DL measure (Janowicz 2006a,
Janowicz et al. 2007) was developed to close the gap between geo-ontologies
described through various kinds of description logics, and similarity measures that
had not been able to handle the expressiveness of such languages. Different
similarity theories (Nedas and Egenhofer 2003, Li and Fonseca 2006) have been
developed to determine the similarity of spatial scenes.

Subsumption-based reasoning has its origins in computer science and especially
within knowledge representation. It is the most prominent of several inference
techniques used within ontology based information retrieval. The idea behind
subsumption-based retrieval as described by Lutz and Klien (2006) is to rearrange a
queried application ontology taking a search concept into account and to return a
new taxonomy in which all subconcepts of the specified search concept satisfy the
user’s requirements. However, using this approach forces the user to ensure that the
search concept is specified in a way that it is neither too generic (and therefore at a
top level of the new hierarchy) nor too specific to get a sufficient result set. In fact,
the search concept is a formal description of the minimum characteristics all
retrieved concepts need to share.

The benefits similarity offers during information retrieval, i.e. to deliver a flexible
degree of conceptual overlap to a searched concept, stand against shortcomings
during the usage of the retrieved information, namely that the results do not
necessarily fit the user’s requirements. To make the difference between both
approaches more evident one can imagine a search concept specified by using a
shared vocabulary (such as the proposed feature type ontology) to retrieve all
concepts whose instances overlap with waterways. In contrast to the subsumption-
based approach, similarity measurement would additionally deliver concepts whose
instances are located inside or adjacent to waterways, and indicate through a lower
degree of similarity that these concepts are close to, but not identical with the user’s
intended concept.

In this work, we use the SIM-DL measure (Janowicz 2006a, Janowicz et al. 2007)
to compare feature types for similarity. SIM-DL supports high expressive
description logics and combines both subsumption and similarity reasoning to
achieve the best possible results22. Similarity between concepts is measured by
comparing their definitions for overlap. A value of 1 indicates that two compared

22 A (prototypical) server implementation is available at http://sim-dl.sourceforge.net/downloads.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1149

concepts are specified by the same set of superconcepts, while 0 indicates that the
concepts have nothing in common. A similarity between 0 and 1 states that the
least some common superconcepts. In general,
compared concepts share at
similarity values should not be interpreted separately but used to derive a ranking.
Based on the specifications given in Section 4.2, channels are more similar (,0.71)
to canals than streams (,0.43), as both have no explicit direction, while a stream
needs to have an origin. On the other hand, a canal is more similar to a stream than
to a lake (,0.28). Note that these similarities are computed on the type level, and
not between particular features described in a gazetteer.

The integration of similarity and subsumption based reasoning into a shared
gazetteer infrastructure is depicted in figure 6. The proposed feature type ontology
can be extended by local gazetteers, which align their own concepts as subtypes of
existing ones. The user can perform type-lookup by selecting a search concept (Cs)

Figure 6. Subsumption and similarity based information retrieval within the proposed
gazetteer infrastructure.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1150

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

using the new interface proposed below. In the case of subsumption, the result is a
list of subconcepts of Cs. In contrast, the cloud representing the similarity query
indicates that the result is a descending list of proximity values describing how close
particular feature types are to the search concept.

5.2 Web interface implementation approach

In this section, we demonstrate how Web interfaces can benefit from a feature type
ontology supporting subsumption and similarity-based reasoning as outlined above.
The focus during the development of the conceptual design of the gazetteer Web
interface presented in the following was on overcoming the problems with the
current Web interfaces shown in Section 3. The proposed interface covers both the
search functionality and the presentation of the results, allowing for a workflow in
which the users can continuously refine their queries until the desired results are
returned. We will concentrate on conceptual aspects and the user workflow in the
following, leaving implementation details aside.

The proposed search interface consists of two input fields and a map as shown in
figure 7(a), reducing the cognitive load for the user as far as possible. The form fields
allow the user to specify a place name and place type to search for. If they want to
restrict the search to a specific region, they can use the map to specify the
corresponding extent. All of these inputs are optional, so that the users can choose
any combination of place name, place type and map extent, depending on what they
are looking for.

The biggest problem of the Web interfaces discussed in Section 3 was the
incorporation of the feature types into the user interface. To avoid lengthy lists and
ambiguous categorizations, we propose a search-while-you-type approach for this
problem: the feature type selection only consists of a text field, so that the users can
fill in whatever feature type they think is suitable to describe what they are looking

Figure 7.
(a) Conceptual design for the gazetteer Web interface: search interface with input
fields for place name and type, and map for spatial restriction. (b) Automatic suggestion of
place types during user input. (c) Display of results as map overlays.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1151

for. As the users enter the feature types they have in mind, lexical matches are
suggested by the Web interface (see figure 7(b)). When the client is loading new data
from the server, this is pointed out by an activity indicator in the place type23 input
field. For every suggestion, direct supertypes and up to five of the most similar
feature types from the ontology are presented, so that the user gets a quick overview
of related types. The similarity of the types is indicated by font size and color: the
less similar the type is to the suggested feature type in the leftmost column, the
smaller and paler it is displayed. This visualization paradigm is adapted from so-
called tag-cloud navigation. For the selection of the most similar types, the proposed
system uses a threshold similarity value to make sure that only reasonable feature
types are displayed. The user can select any of the types suggested by the system by
clicking on it. The feature type is then transferred to the input field and used for the
query.

While the user adapts his query, results are continuously loaded from the server
and displayed on the map. To avoid overloading the map with too many results,
query results are only displayed if the number is below a predefined threshold. If the
current query returns too many results, a corresponding note is shown on the form.
Results are first shown as overlays on the map; the user can then click on them to
retrieve detailed information on the feature, as shown in figure 7(c). Although there
are no human subjects tests on the efficiency, effectiveness, and ease of use of the
proposed Web interface yet, the simplification of the search form can be expected to
significantly speed up retrieval of the desired results, especially for users who are not
familiar with the structure behind the Web interface. The core functionalities of the
proposed interface are made possible in the first place by the formal feature type
definitions in the ontology and the reasoning methods presented in Section 5.1.

5.3 Application programming interfaces approach

Comparable to the Web interfaces, current APIs suffer from the fact that the API
users have to know exactly what they are looking for. Detailed knowledge about the
gazetteers internal organization of the feature types is required to compose a query
that returns the desired results. In particular, the lack of support for similarity-based
queries hampers the usability of the APIs. The user is not provided with features
that do not exactly match his query, but that are very similar and could thus be
useful. Moreover, support for more complex query functionality that addresses the
relationships between feature types, as described in detail within a feature type
ontology, would be beneficial. In the following, we will sketch an API that makes
use of the multiple inheritance structure of a feature type ontology to provide
advanced API functionality.

We use the ADL Gazetteer Protocol (see Section 3) as a starting point for our
proposed API, as it provides the most enhanced functionality of the existing APIs.
Due to its implementation as XML-over-HTTP—the current quasi-standard for
Web-based APIs—it can easily be combined with other APIs and XML-based data
sources. This is also in line with the AJAX-based Web interface proposed in the
previous section, which also relies on XML as the data transfer format. To make full
use of the structural information provided by a feature type ontology, the ADL API
needs to be extended with functionality to support reasoning and similarity

23 The technical term feature is avoided in the user interface in favor of the more common place.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1152

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

measurement. To reuse existing specifications that have proven useful in practice, we
use the DIG24 interface as a starting point for the reasoning functionality of our
gazetteer API.

The DIG interface is an API specification for reasoning in DL systems (Bechhofer
2003). In particular, it can be used to reason on formal knowledge representations
written in OWL. The design of DIG can be compared to the ADL API: it is based
on XML-over-HTTP, and the functionality of a concrete DIG instance can be
queried by an identification request. The document returned by the server contains
information on the supported DL language constructs, so that clients know which
reasoning functionality can be performed on this server instance. This is especially
important because of the variety of DL languages, i.e. not every DIG server will
support all constructs that are part of the specification (the basic constructs are
compulsory, however). Once the client is aware of the functionality provided by the
server, all further communication is based on two types of documents: Tells
documents allow the client to build a knowledge base on the server, whereas Asks
documents allow the client to perform reasoning tasks on this knowledge base.

The original DIG specification has been developed for standard reasoning tasks
such as checking for subsumption and disjointness, or queries based on the concept
and role hierarchies. To enable similarity measurement, DIG’s Asks language must
be extended by queries that allow for the computation of the similarity of two or
more concepts. A combination of such a similarity-enabled DIG version with the
ADL API provides all functionality required to implement the Web interface
proposed above. In addition, this combined API enables complex queries that go far
beyond what is possible with current gazetteers. As an example, we show how a
query for all rivers which have their springs in California would look in our proposed
API. Note that this query is not possible with current gazetteers, as the underlying
feature schemas lack information on the relationships between rivers and springs.
We assume that the knowledge base on the server is already present and can now be
used. The following extract shows the relevant parts of the query document:

…
1 <gazetteer-query>
2 <class-query term5‘‘River’’>
3 <property-query term5‘‘hasOrigin’’>
4 <class-query term5‘‘Spring’’>
5 <spatial-relation-query term5‘‘inside’’>
6 <feature-type-query term5‘‘FederalState’’>
7 <name-query term5‘‘California’’/>
8 </feature-type-query>
9 </spatial-relation-query>
10 </class-query>
11 </property-query term5‘‘hasOrigin’’>
12 </class-query>
13 </gazetteer-query>
…

The pseudo-code in the example shows how the restrictions for the query are
hierarchically defined, based on different types of query commands. First, all

24 Description Logic Implementation Group, http://dig.sourceforge.net/

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1153

features of type River are selected (line 2). Then, this result set is further restricted to
those rivers which have an origin (line 3) of type Spring (line 4). The set of springs
under consideration is then restricted by a spatial query to those which lie inside (line
5) features of type FederalState (line 6) that are named California (line 7). The
example shows the support for complex queries based on the ontological structure;
language constructs based on similarity can be employed accordingly. Comparable
to the Web interface (which actually builds upon this API), the improvements in
functionality compared to current gazetteer APIs are based on the detailed formal
feature type descriptions in the ontology. The information in current thesauri is not
sufficiently structured to support detailed queries that make use of subsumption and
similarity based reasoning.

What was discussed here for DIG can also be applied to the similarity enabled
iSPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language (Kiefer et al. 2007) developed for the
upcoming Semantic Web infrastructure.

6. Conclusions and further work

In this paper, we have discussed steps towards the development of a shared feature
type ontology, based on a survey of current feature typing schemes and their
interfaces. The benefits of such an ontology for Web interfaces, application
programming interfaces and a forthcoming gazetteer infrastructure were examined
in detail. New kinds of interfaces have been proposed based on the extended type-
lookup functionality realized by integrating the ontology with gazetteers and
similarity and subsumption based
reasoning services. The combination of
information retrieval has been portrayed as a promising development towards
intuitive and reliable gazetteer interfaces.

In conclusion, current gazetteers provide only suboptimal support for users
during the query process. Users require detailed knowledge of the structure behind
the gazetteer and its feature type scheme to make full use of its functionality. While
some of the difficulties in the query process stem from user interface issues, the lack
of expressiveness of the feature type thesauri poses the biggest challenge for
gazetteer improvement. We have proposed a distributed feature type ontology,
based on formal specifications of both the feature types and the relations among
them. The envisioned ontology solves several shortcomings of current gazetteers. It
enables distributed gazetteer management, as opposed to the current centralized
approach, so that maintenance tasks can be completed by local gazetteer operators.
This distributed approach allows for both efficient updates as well as the
incorporation of local particularities such as special names for certain places.
Second, from the users’ perspective, a feature type ontology opens up possibilities
for improved gazetteer interaction. Web interfaces can benefit from subsumption
and similarity-based search functionality that no longer require the user to know
what is meant by a specific feature type: they can refine their initial query based on
the interface’s suggestions until they find the desired information. New gazetteer
APIs can include support for complex reasoning tasks and similarity queries.

Although an ontology-based gazetteer

infrastructure promises numerous
improvements compared to the current state of gazetteers, most components that
are required to put such an ontology into practice are still under development or in
the conceptual design phase. First results from human subject tests indicate that the
SIM-DL theory produces cognitively plausible results (Janowicz 2007); however,
further tests are required to verify the behavior of SIM-DL. The proposed gazetteer

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1154

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

interface (Web interface and API) is currently under development. Human subjects
tests for parts of the feature type ontology are currently being prepared and will be
followed by tests for the gazetteer Web interface when the implementation is
finished. Whether the presented reasoning capabilities and interfaces are useful
depends mostly on the underlying ontology as subsumption and similarity are
determined with respect to the specifications made there. Further work has to focus
on developing such a feature type ontology as a common agreement between several
interest groups. To this end, gazetteer researchers and geographers have to agree on
how to define a common (and generic) domain model for relevant feature types, but
the user’s perspective also needs to be taken into account. Tests point out that
people tend to mix up certain feature types (such as canals and channels) and
topological relations (Riedemann 2005). Additionally, categorization and the
perception of similarity depend on cultural background: consequently research
from ethnophysiography (Mark and Turk 2003) needs to be taken into account. A
follow up workshop of the NCGIA Gazetteer Research and Practice Meeting in
2006 could be a good starting point to debate such issues.

From a formal ontology point of view and taking into account the standardiza-
tion step proposed by van Assem et al. (2004), further work should focus on aligning
the presented feature type ontology to top level ontologies such as DOLCE25.

In terms of software development and infrastructure, the introduced SIM-DL
server needs to be extended to handle more expressive description logics. While the
current implementation of the identity assumption service for historical places
(Janowicz 2006b) mentioned in Section 1 uses the ADL FTT for its similarity
assumptions, later versions would also benefit from the feature type ontology.

At last, reviewing existing gazetteers and feature type thesauri led us back to the
question of place identity. For example, ADL and Getty list more than 15
alternative or historical names for Istanbul and also point to the former and recent
upper level geopolitical units; but what does it actually mean – that Constantinople,
Byzantium and Istanbul are the same place? Is there a need for a formal theory of
identity of places? To what degree does a certain place persist, despite periodic
changes in names, geometries and dominions (including cultural and religious
aspects)?

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Linda Hill for giving us a detailed insight into the
development and conceptualization of the ADL FTT and for fruitful comments
concerning the proposed conceptual design. Discussions with Naicong Li and
Catharina Riedemann have shaped our ideas on how to implement the presented
feature type ontology. The ideas for a shared gazetteer infrastructure and a new kind
of Web interface were outcomes of the NCGIA Gazetteer Research and Practice
Workshop held in December 2006 in Santa Barbara, USA. Partial funding for this
work came from the SimCat project granted by the German Research Foundation
(DFG).

References
ANSI/NISO, 2005, ANSI/NISO Z39.19 – 2005 guidelines for the construction, format, and

management of monolingual controlled vocabularies (Bethesda, MD: NISO Press).

25 Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering: http://www.loa-cnr.it/DOLCE.html

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1155

BAADER, F., CALVANESE, D., MCGUINNESS, D.L., NARDI, D., and PATEL-SCHNEIDER, P.F.
(Eds), 2003, The description logic handbook: theory, implementation, and applications
(Cambridge University Press).

BECHHOFER, S., 2003, The DIG Description Logic Interface: DIG/1.1. Available online at:

http://dl-web.man.ac.uk/dig/2003/02/interface.pdf.

BITTNER, T., DONNELLY, M. and SMITH, B., 2004, Individuals, universals, collections: on the
foundational relations of ontology. In: A. Varzi and L. Vieu (Eds). Proceedings of the
Third Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS-04), 4–6
November, 2004, Torino, Italy (Amsterdam: IOS Press), pp. 37–48.

CASATI, R. and VARZI, A.C., 1999, Parts and places. The structures of spatial representation

(Cambridge and London: MIT Press).

FIELDING, R., 2000, Architectural styles and the design of network-based software

architectures. Thesis (PhD). University of California.

FITZKE, J. and ATKINSON, R., 2006, OGC Best Practices Document: Gazetteer Service –
Application Profile of the Web Feature Service Implementation Specification Version
0.9.3. Technical Report, Open Geospatial Consortium.

GA¨ RDENFORS, P., 2000, Conceptual spaces – the geometry of thought (Cambridge, MA:

Bradford Books, MIT Press).

GIBSON, J., 1977, The theory of affordances. In: R. Shaw and J. Bransford (Eds). Perceiving,
acting, and knowing – toward an ecological psychology (Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Ass.), pp. 67–82.

GOLDSTONE, R. and SON, J., 2005, Similarity. In: K. Holyoak and R. Morrison (Eds).
Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), pp. 13–36.

GOODMAN, N., 1972, Seven strictures on similarity. In: N. Goodman, (Ed). Problems and

projects (New York: Bobbs-Merrill), pp. 437–447.

GRUBER, T., 1993, A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge

Acquisition, 5, pp. 199–220.

GUARINO, N., 1998, Formal ontology and information systems. In: N. Guarino, (Ed). Formal

ontology in information systems (Trento, Italy: IOS Press), pp. 3–15.

HASTINGS, J.T., 2008, Automated conflation of digital gazetteer data. International Journal of

Geographical Information Science, 22, pp. 1109–1127.

HEPP, M., 2006, Products and services ontologies: a methodology for deriving OWL
ontologies from industrial categorization standards. International Journal on Semantic
Web & Information Systems (IJSWIS), 2(1), pp. 72–99.

HILL, L.L., 2006, Georeferencing: the geographic associations of information (digital libraries

and electronic publishing (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).

HILL, L.L., FREW, J. and ZHENG, Q., 1999, Geographic names: the implementation of a

gazetteer in a georeferenced digital library. D-Lib Magazine, 5(1).

HORROCKS, I., PATEL-SCHNEIDER, P.F. and VAN HARMELEN, F., 2003, From SHIQ and RDF
to OWL: the making of a web ontology language. Journal of Web Semantics, 1, pp.
7–26.

ISO, 1986, ISO2788:1986 – Guidelines for the establishment and development of monolingual

thesauri. Technical Report, International Standards Organization.

ISO, 2003, ISO19112:2003, Geographic information – spatial referencing by geographic

identifiers. Technical Report, International Standards Organization.

JANE´ E, G., 2006, Rethinking gazetteers and interoperability. In: International Workshop on
Digital Gazetteer Research & Practice, 7–9 December, 2006, Santa Barbara,
California.

JANOWICZ, K., 2006a, Sim-DL: towards a semantic similarity measurement theory for the
description logic ALCNR in geographic information retrieval. In: R. Meersman, Z.
Tari and P. Herrero, et al., SeBGIS 2006, OTM Workshops 2006, 4278 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 29–30 October 2006, Montpellier, France (Berlin:
Springer), pp. 1681–1692.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 1156

K. Janowicz and C. Keßler

JANOWICZ, K., 2007, Similarity-based Retrieval for Geospatial Semantic Web Services
specified using the Web Service Modeling Language (WSML-core). In: A. Scharl
and K. Tochtermann (Eds). The Geospatial Web – How Geo-Browsers, Social
Software and the Web 2.0 are Shaping the Network Society, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (London: Springer), pp. 235–245.

JANOWICZ, K., KESSLER, C., SCHWARZ, M., WILKES, M., PANOV, I., ESPETER, M. and
BA¨ UMER, B., 2007, Algorithm,
implementation and application of the SIM-DL
the Second International Conference on
Similarity Server.
GeoSpatial Semantics (GeoS 2007), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 29–30
November, 2007, Mexico (Berlin, New York, Heidelberg: Springer), pp. 128–145.

In: Proceedings of

JANOWICZ, K., 2006b, Towards a similarity-based identity assumption service for historical
places. In: M. Raubal, H.J. Miller, A.U. Frank and M.F. Goodchild (Eds).
Proceedings of the Geographic Information Science, 4th International Conference,
GIScience 2006, 4197 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 20–23 September 2006,
Mu¨ nster, Germany (Berlin: Springer), pp. 199–216.

KIEFER, C., BERNSTEIN, A. and STOCKER, M., 2007, The fundamentals of iSPARQL – a
virtual triple approach for similarity-based semantic web tasks. In: Proceedings of the
Proceedings of the 6th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, 12 November 2007, Busan, Korea (Berlin, New York,
Heidelberg: Springer), pp. 295–309.

KUHN, W., 2007, An image-schematic account of spatial categories. In: Proceedings of the 5th
Conference on Spatial Information Theory (COSIT 2007), 4736 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. 19–23 September 2007, Melbourne, Australia (Berlin, New York,
Heidelberg: Springer), pp. 152–169.

LI, B. and FONSECA, F., 2006, TDD – a comprehensive model for qualitative spatial similarity

assessment. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 6, pp. 31–62.

LUTZ, M. and KLIEN, E., 2006, Ontology-based retrieval of geographic information.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 20, pp. 233–260.
MARK, D.M. and TURK, A.G., 2003, Landscape categories in Yindjibarndi: ontology,
environment, and language. In: W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys and S. Timpf (Eds).
Proceedings of
Information Theory. Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, International Conference, COSIT 2003, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 24–28 September 2003, Ittingen, Switzerland (Berlin: Springer),
pp. 28–45.

the Spatial

MEDIN, D., GOLDSTONE, R. and GENTNER, D., 1993, Respects for similarity. Psychological

Review, 100, pp. 254–278.

NEDAS, K. and EGENHOFER, M., 2003, Spatial similarity queries with logical operators. In: T.
Hadzilacos, Y. Manolopoulos, J. Roddick and Y. Theodoridis (Eds). SSTD ’03 –
Eighth International Symposium on Spatial and Temporal Databases, Santorini, Greece,
2750 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, July 2003, Santorini, Greece (Berlin:
Springer), pp. 430–448.

RAUBAL, M., 2004, Formalizing conceptual spaces. In: A. Varzi and L. Vieu (Eds). Formal
Ontology in Information Systems, Proceedings of the Third International Conference
(FOIS 2004), 114 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, 4–6
November 2004, Turin, Italy (Amsterdam, NL: IOS Press), pp. 153–164.

RIEDEMANN, C., 2005, Matching names and definitions of topological operators. In: A.G.
Cohn and D.M. Mark (Eds). Proceedings of
the Spatial Information Theory.
Foundations of Geographic Information Science, International Conference, COSIT
2005, 3693 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Ellicottville, NY, USA (Berlin:
Springer), pp. 165–181.

RODRIGUEZ, A. and EGENHOFER, M., 2004, Comparing geospatial entity classes: an
asymmetric and context-dependent similarity measure. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 18, pp. 229–256.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 The role of ontology in improving gazetteer interaction

1157

SMITH, B., 2006, Against idiosyncrasy in ontology development. In: B. Bennett and C.
Fellbaum (Eds). Proceedings of the Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS
2006), 9–11 November 2006, Baltimore, USA (Amsterdam: IOS Press), pp. 15–26.

SOWA, J.F., 2000, Knowledge representation:

logical, philosophical and computational

foundations (Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole Publishing).

STUDER, R., BENJAMINS, V.R. and FENSEL, D., 1998, Knowledge engineering: principles and

methods. Data Knowledge Engineering, 25, pp. 161–197.

TVERSKY, A., 1977, Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, pp. 327–352.
USCHOLD, M., 2000, Creating, integrating and maintaining local and global ontologies. In:
Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI), 20–25
August 2000, Berlin, Germany (Amsterdam: IOS Press), pp. 20–25.

VAN ASSEM, M., MENKEN, M., SCHREIBER, G., WIELEMAKER, J. and WIELINGA, B., 2004, A
method for converting thesauri to RDF/OWL. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC’04), 7–11 November 2004, Hiroshima, Japan, 3298
(New York, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer).

WINSTON, M.E., CHAFFIN, R. and HERRMANN, D., 1987, A taxonomy of part-whole

relations. Cognitive Science, 11, pp. 417–444.

Downloaded by [Southern Illinois University] at 08:10 08 November 2014 