This article was downloaded by: [The UC Irvine Libraries]
On: 19 October 2014, At: 13:38
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

International Journal of Geographical
Information Science
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tgis20

Automated building generalization
based on urban morphology and
Gestalt theory
Z. Li a , H. Yan a b , T. Ai a c & J. Chen d
a Department of Land Surveying and Geo-Informatics , The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Kowloon, Hong Kong E-mail:
b Lanzhou Jiaotong University , Lanzhou, 730070, China
c School of Resource and Environment Sciences , Wuhan
University , China
d National Geometrics Center of China , 1 Baishengcun,
Zizhuyuan, Beijing 100044, China
Published online: 06 Oct 2011.

To cite this article: Z. Li , H. Yan , T. Ai & J. Chen (2004) Automated building generalization
based on urban morphology and Gestalt theory , International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 18:5, 513-534

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658810410001702021

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms

& Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/
terms-and-conditions

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 INT. J. GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
VOL. 18, NO. 5, JULY–AUGUST 2004, 513–534

Research Article

Automated building generalization based on urban morphology and
Gestalt theory

Z. LI1, H. YAN1,2, T. AI1,3 and J. CHEN4
1Department of Land Surveying and Geo-Informatics, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong; e-mail: lszlli@polyu.edu.hk
2Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou, 730070, China
3School of Resource and Environment Sciences, Wuhan University, China
4National Geometrics Center of China, 1 Baishengcun, Zizhuyuan, Beijing
100044, China

(Received 23 March 2003; accepted 13 November 2003 )

Abstract. Building generalization is a difﬁcult operation due to the complexity
of the spatial distribution of buildings and for reasons of spatial recognition. In
this study, building generalization is decomposed into two steps, i.e. building
in urban
grouping and generalization execution. The neighbourhood model
morphology provides global constraints for guiding the global partitioning of
building sets on the whole map by means of roads and rivers, by which enclaves,
blocks, superblocks or neighbourhoods are formed; whereas the local constraints
from Gestalt principles provide criteria for the further grouping of enclaves,
blocks, superblocks and/or neighbourhoods. In the grouping process, graph
theory, Delaunay triangulation and the Voronoi diagram are employed as
supporting techniques. After grouping, some useful information, such as the sum
of the building’s area, the mean separation and the standard deviation of the
separation of buildings, is attached to each group. By means of the attached
information, an appropriate operation is selected to generalize the corresponding
groups. Indeed, the methodology described brings together a number of well-
developed theories/techniques, including graph theory, Delaunay triangulation,
the Voronoi diagram, urban morphology and Gestalt theory, in such a way that
multiscale products can be derived.

1.

Introduction
Automated map generalization has been a hot issue in the GIS and cartography
communities since the 1960s. In the past two decades, a great deal of effort has
gone into developing geometric algorithms (operators) and, as a result, many
algorithms (operators) for speciﬁc map features have been developed. (In the
to an algorithm,
context of
transformation model, or procedure to realize a generalization operation e.g.
aggregation. However, in some other studies, the term ‘operator’ is used to mean
the generalization operation.) They include algorithms for point feature general-
linear feature
ization (Van Kreveld 1995, Yukio 1997, Ai and Liu 2002),

this paper, a generalization operator

refers

International Journal of Geographical Information Science
ISSN 1365-8816 print/ISSN 1362-3087 online # 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/13658810410001702021

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 514

Z. Li et al.

generalization (Douglas and Peucker 1973, Li and Openshaw 1992, Wang and
Mu¨ ller 1992, De Berg et al., 1995) and areal feature generalization (Monmonier
1983, Zhang and Tulip 1990, Mu¨ ller and Wang 1992, Schylberg 1992a, b, 1993,
Beines 1993, Su and Li 1995, Li and Su 1996, Su and Li 1997, 1997a, b, Bader and
Weibel 1997, Barrault 2001, Ruas 2001, Galanda and Weibel 2002). It
is
understandable that an algorithm (operator) is concerned about how to achieve
a generalization operation (referred to as an operator in some studies), e.g.
combination of areal features or the simpliﬁcation of a line. Algorithms (operators)
are designed for geometric transformations only. If an algorithm (operator) could
realize a particular generalization operation well, it is a good algorithm for this
particular operation. The question that arises is when does one use such an
algorithm (operator) (McMaster and Shea 1989)? That is, the scene needs to be set
based on some geographical attributes and spatial conﬁgurations. Alternatively,
constraints need to be formed for the use of
the generalization algorithms
(operators). Here, constraints refer to the guidelines for the generalization of
speciﬁc features, which determine the use of appropriate generalization algorithms
(operators). A constraint could be local if it is for a single object or global if for a
set of objects. Also, depending on their nature, constraints could be topological,
metric or geographical.

In recent years, research on the ‘constraints’ of map generalization has been
emphasized (Ruas and Plazanet 1996, Sester 2000, Harrie 2002). It is noticeable that
most of the constraints are for individual objects. However, ‘deﬁning constraints on
groups of objects is more difﬁcult, and often requires the preservation of object
patterns, which is particularly difﬁcult’ (Harrie 2002). Such a remark is particularly
true for the development of constraints for building features, and the discussion in
this paper is conﬁned to this topic.

In the development of constraints for the generalization of building features,
Regnauld (1996, 2001) carried out some interesting research. He detected and
organized building relations using the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) and used a
graph of proximity on the building set, which was analysed and segmented with
respect to various criteria taken from Gestalt theory. Such analysis provides some
essential geographical information, such as the average size of buildings, shape of
the group and density, attached to each group of buildings. Christophe and Ruas
(2002) detected building alignments using straight-line
templates. Building
alignments are identiﬁed from the templates. The alignments are then characterized
by a set of parameters such as proximity and similarity, and only those perceptually
regular buildings are retained. Rainsford and Mackness (2002) have also used the
template matching technique for building grouping. Boffet and Serra (2001)
identiﬁed spatial structures within urban blocks for the characterization of towns.
Anders and Sester (2000) put forward a parameter-free cluster detection method
used in spatial databases. Ware and Jones (1998) introduced simulated annealing to
handle the displacement of buildings while preserving the alignment. The common
drawback of such processes lies in the heavy computation involved (Boffet and
Serra 2001). There is also a lack of global constraints to guide the use of an
appropriate algorithm to generalize individual groups of buildings after the
grouping has been made. The objective of the present paper is to describe an
integrated methodology for the fully automated generalization of buildings. The
contents include (1) the automated grouping of buildings, (2) the automated

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

515

selection of a generalization operation and (3) the automated execution of the
generalization process.

The paper is organized as follows. After the introduction (Section 1) is a general
the operations and constraints used in building generalization
discussion of
(Section 2). Section 3 focuses on the global constraints from urban morphology in
grouping buildings. Section 4 discusses in detail the local constraints based on
Gestalt principles. The building grouping process is presented in Section 5, and the
process of building generalization is discussed in Section 6. Section 7 presents an
approach to evaluating the results of the generalization. An example to illustrate the
method is given in Section 8. Finally, some conclusions are presented in Section 9.

2. Building generalization: operations and constraints

Researchers have tried various theories (e.g. Gestalt theory) and methodologies
(e.g. cluster detection and spatial structure analysis) for the generalization of
buildings. Indeed, signiﬁcant achievements have already been made in this area
(Lichner 1979, Regnauld 2001). The present paper contributes to advancing this
area in the following two aspects:

. By offering a theoretically sound methodology for grouping.
. By devising a set of rules for determining which generalization operation

should be employed for a given case.

2.1. Analysis of possible operations for building generalization

In a digital environment, the generalization process has been decomposed into
many operations (McMaster and Shea 1992), such as simpliﬁcation, aggregation,
combinations, collapse, etc. In particular, considering building features only, the
following seem to form a subset of operations,
i.e. aggregation, collapse,
displacement, exaggeration, selective omission, simpliﬁcation and typiﬁcation.
The meanings of these operations are derived from the work by McMaster and
Shea, with occasional modiﬁcations. Table 1 illustrates such operations.

Table 1. Possible operations for the generalization of buildings.

Operators Operators

Original

Simply reduced Generalized

Aggregation

Collapse

Displacement

Exaggeration

Elimination

Simpliﬁcation

Typiﬁcation

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 516

Z. Li et al.

. Aggregation: to combine buildings separated by space.
. Collapse:

to make the feature represented by a symbol with a lower

dimension, e.g. to represent a city as a point feature on small-scale maps.
. Displacement: to move the building to a slightly different position, normally

to solve the problem of conﬂict.

. Exaggeration: to enlarge a building with small size for representation at a

smaller scale maps on which it should be too small to be represented.

. Selective omission (or elimination): to eliminate small and unimportant

buildings.

. Simpliﬁcation: to make the shape simpler.
. Typiﬁcation: to represent buildings with a typical distribution pattern, e.g. to
represent groups of buildings aligned in rows (e.g. ﬁve rows) using fewer (e.g.
three) rows.

Displacement and exaggeration can in fact be considered as a post-general-
ization process at the stage of graphic presentation (Li and Su 1995). Collapse
means to represent an area feature using a line (e.g. river) or a point (e.g. a city) (Su
et al. 1998). This happens only when the change in scale is very dramatic and the
target scale is very small. A discussion of collapse is beyond the scope of this study.
Therefore, building groupings will only be related to such generalization operations
as aggregation, simpliﬁcation, elimination, and typiﬁcation. (In this study, no
differentiation is made between amalgamation and aggregation because the
procedures for both operations are virtually the same.)

2.2. Two types of constraints for building grouping: global and local

In the cognitive interpretation of visual signals, two steps are involved, i.e. a
preattentive phase and an attentive phase. In the former, an unconscious attempt is
made quickly to extract information from an image through a global search
operation that involves active grouping. The latter is a local phase,
in which
attention is paid to speciﬁc features of the visual landscape that have been identiﬁed
as being different during the preattentive phase. That is, the global searching for
groupings and locally focused identiﬁcation are involved.

It is understandable that the visual information processing in map recognition is
also similar. It can be imagined that in the generalization of building features,
cartographers must also have followed such a two-step process. In other words,
there is a group of global constraints and a group of local constraints for the
grouping and then the generalization of buildings. After the constraints have been
formed, the generalization operations can then be carried out. Finally, a quality
assessment is made of the generalized map, and of the individual groups and
neighbourhood. This strategy will be the one followed in this study.

3. Global constraints based on urban morphology

As discussed previously, there is a need for two types of constraints in the
generalization of buildings, i.e. global and local. This section is devoted to the
formation of global constraints.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

517

3.1. Basic ideas in urban morphology

Urban morphology, dealing with the structure and/or pattern of a city, is a well-
established discipline. Therefore, some of the principles used in urban morphology
may be adopted for grouping buildings for the purpose of map generalization.

Urban morphology is about the hierarchical structure of a city. Indeed, in a
classic neighbourhood model (Patricios 2002) in urban morphology, a city is, in
essence, a hierarchical one comprising four levels, i.e.

. Enclave.
. Block.
. Superblock.
. Neighbourhood.

Figure 1 shows four such levels in a hierarchy. The fundamental component is
an enclave of 20 or so houses. Three or four of these enclaves are lined together to
form a block. The enclaves within the block are separated from one another by a
pedestrian pathway. The blocks are arranged around the sides of a central parkway
in such a manner as to enclose the open green spaces. The clustered blocks, together
with the central parkway, comprise a superblock. Several adjacent superblocks
together form a neighbourhood bounded by major roads or natural features. Each
neighbourhood is a fundamental unit of the city.

The roads in the neighbourhood are arranged hierarchically. Major trafﬁc roads
border each neighbourhood; distributor roads surround each superblock; cul-de-
sacs provide access to individual property lots.

It has become natural to think that such a hierarchical partitioning of a city can
be used for the hierarchical representation of urban features, such as buildings and
roads, on maps at different scales. The four levels of the hierarchy must correspond
to a change in scale. Of course, if the change in scale is too great, then the whole

Figure 1. Hierarchical structure of cities (after Patricios 2002). (a) Enclave, (b) block,
(c) superblock and (d) neighbourhood.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 518

Z. Li et al.

city may become a point. But at such a change in scale, not much needs to be done
in terms of generalization. Indeed, this neighbourhood model provides a macro
view for the generalization of buildings with a limited range of change in scale, and
can be used to form global constraints.

3.2. Global constraints based on urban morphology

The neighbourhood model plays two roles in the formation of global constraints

for building grouping and generalization:

. Neighbourhood model is used for global partitioning. In this step, an analysis
of the whole map area is made. The features analysed are mainly roads and
rivers, but not the buildings themselves. The axes of the roads and rivers are
ﬁrst extracted. The topological polygons of these crossed lines are then
constructed. Each polygon stands for a partitioned global group of buildings.
superblocks or
The resultant groups correspond to enclaves, blocks,
neighbourhoods due to different reductions in scale. Figure 2 is an example
of global partitioning using the neighbourhood model. The extraction of
medial-axes from streets is not a very sophisticated process, nor is the
construction of topological polygons using crossed lines (Gold 1991, Klein
and Meimer 1993, Christensen 1999). Therefore, no details will be given here.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. Global partitioning using the neighbourhood model. (a) Street map of a city and
(b) global partition based on the topological polygons formed by the street axes.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

519

What should be accentuated is that roads (and rivers if any) have a higher
priority than buildings in the process of automated map generalization, as in
the case of manual generalization. In other words, only after roads are
generalized can the global partitioning of buildings in the same area be
calculated correctly. In the following study,
is
restricted to buildings within one street block.

the building alignment

. After generalization,

created based on the
neighbourhood model are used as criteria to check if the relations among
buildings and linear features (rivers and roads) have been well preserved, by
which the harmony of the whole map can be ensured.

topological polygons

the

4. Local constraints based on Gestalt principles

After the global partitioning step, building sets in blocks, superblocks or
neighbourhoods are not well arranged. Whether or not the buildings can easily be
generalized is still uncertain, as the conﬁgurations and the relations among a group
of buildings are still unknown. At this stage, it is not easy to determine which
operation (e.g. aggregation) should be employed to generalize a speciﬁc group.
Therefore, it is necessary to detect, analyse and group the global groups.

This step consists of two procedures: forming fundamental groups and the
reunion of the fundamental groups. Gestalt principles are the theoretical basis for
these procedures.

4.1. Gestalt principles

It has been noted that Gestalt principles have been applied for the recognition
of spatial distribution patterns for many years (Weibel 1996), in both digital and
manual generalization. In any case, from the point of view of perception, one
conclusion from the research results remains unquestionable (Rock, 1996):

Grouping is not a simple, early process that works only on properties of image-
based representations. Rather, it is a much more sophisticated process, one that
incorporates the results of pictorial depth perception, occlusion, and amodal
completion, as well as stereoscopic depth perception and lightness constancy.

Wertheimer (1923) took the initial step of identifying a number of important
factors that have come to be known as the ‘Gestalt law of grouping’, although
‘principle of grouping’ is perhaps a more appropriate description. These principles
are proximity, similarity, closure, continuity and common fate. To this list, two
more factors have recently been added, i.e. common region (Palmer 1992) and
element connectedness (Palmer and Rock 1994). For the detection of building
alignments, the factor of common orientation plays an important role and we will
also add it to the list. The deﬁnitions of these factors are as follows:

. Proximity: closeness.
. Similarity, i.e. the factor of likeness. If rows of stimuli with constituents of
different sorts are given, there is a tendency towards the form in which the
like ones appear grouped together.

. Common fate:

the factor of uniform destiny,
generated if an operation is used on the objects in original groups.

i.e. new groups may be

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 520

Z. Li et al.

. Common region: objects in same region are more easily grouped together.
. Closure: an object group with a closed tendency is easily regarded as being

perceptually closed.

. Continuity: the regularity or tendency cannot be easily disturbed, for example,

two crossed curves keep their continuity respectively.

. Element connectedness: connected elements can easily form a group.
. Common orientation: distribution along a similar direction.

Table 2 illustrates these factors. Indeed, these factors provide local perceptual
constraints for grouping. The local constraints, together with the global ones from
urban morphology, play their roles respectively at different stages in the grouping
and generalization of buildings.

4.2. Setting up Gestalt parameters as constraints

To group buildings locally, the Gestalt factors should be customized for the case
of building to form some new parameters. The thresholds for these parameters
should then be set. To clarify these parameters, ﬁve deﬁnitions are given as follows:

Table 2. Graphic illustrations of Gestalt factors.

Examples

Gestalt factors

Proximity

Similarity

Common fate

Common region

Closure

Continuity

Element connectedness

Common orientation

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

521

Figure 3. Two kinds of direct alignments.

(a) Extension alignment and (b) parallel

alignment.

. Major axis of a polygon: an axis is a line segment joining the mid-points of
two edges of the polygon. The longest axis among them is deﬁned as the
major axis (i.e. the thick lines of ﬁgure 3).

. Minor axis of a polygon: this is an imaginary axis. It is perpendicular to the
major axis and passes through the midpoint of the major axis. Its length is
equal to the ratio between the area of the polygon and the length of the major
axis.

. Deviation angle: this is an acute or right angle formed by two crossed straight

lines (they are generally major axes in building grouping).

. Approximate parallels: if the deviation angle of two lines is less than 10‡
the two lines are regarded as being approximate

(experimental value),
parallels.

. Approximately equal length: if Lmax–LminvLlimit or (Lmax–Lmin)/Lmaxv0.5,
the two line segments are deﬁned as being approximately equal in length.
Here, Lmax is the length of the longer line segment and Lmin is the shorter one.

Based on experience, the following thresholds are used for these parameters. A
graphic illustration of the parameters and the threshold values is given in table 3.

Table 3. Graphic illustrations of Gestalt parameters speciﬁcally for buildings.

Examples

Parameters

Separation threshold

Length threshold

Area threshold

Similar size

Similar shape

Similar orientation

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 522

Z. Li et al.

. Length threshold, Llimit:

the length of

the shortest edges that can be

represented on buildings, generally 0.3 mm.

. Area threshold, Alimit:

the area of
represented on maps by its real size, generally 0.660.4 mm2.

the smallest building that can be

. Separation threshold, Dlimit: the minimum distance between two buildings

that is required for clarity, generally 0.5 mm.

. Similar size: if Amax/Aminv2 or both Amax and Amin are less than Alimit, two

buildings are regarded as being of a similar size. Here:

Amax: area of the bigger building;
Amin: area of the smaller building.

. Similar shape: if Emax/Emin¡1.5, the two buildings are regarded as being of a

similar shape. Here:

Emax: greater edge number of the two buildings;
Emin: lesser edge number of the two buildings.

. Similar orientation: if one of the following two rules is satisﬁed, the two

buildings are regarded as being of a similar orientation:

Major axes of the two buildings are approximately parallel;
Major axis of a building and its minor axis are of approximately equal length;
meanwhile, the major or minor axis of this building is approximately parallel
with the major axis of another building.

5. Building grouping based on urban morphology and Gestalt principles

In the previous sections, the ideas of urban morphology and Gestalt principles
are introduced and some parameters are also set for building grouping. In this
section, the actual grouping procedures will be described.

5.1. Procedures for local grouping

Two procedures have been developed, one for the case of maps with adjacent
scales and the other for maps with non-adjacent scales. Here, adjacent scale means
that the ratio between two scales is 2 or 2.5. For example, 1:25 000 and 1:50 000 are
adjacent scales, whereas 1:25 000 and 1/100 000 are not. In this paper, the map scale
series with the scales Ss, S1, S2, ..., Sn, St. Ss donates the source map scale and is the
largest map scale in the series; St is the target map scale and is the smallest map
scale in the list; S1 the adjacent scale of Ss, S2 the adjacent scale of S1, ..., and Sn is
the adjacent scale of St.

The procedure for local grouping for maps with adjacent scales works as

follows:

. Topological adjacency relationships are detected using the triangulation
network of the buildings, by which the street axes between buildings are
extracted. Two buildings with adjacency relations are directly linked and
those without adjacency relations are separated.

. Direct alignments between every two topologically adjacent buildings

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

523

(ﬁgure 3) are identiﬁed using the constraints from the Gestalt theory. The
indirect alignments (ﬁgure 4) among a row/column of buildings are then built
upon the direct alignment relations.

. Buildings with strong perceptual relations in each indirect alignment are

separated from the other ones to form groups.

. Non-alignment buildings and those alignments with weak perceptual relations
are clustered according to their distance, shape, size, and free space relations
to obtain the resultant group set. Some useful information (i.e. attributes) is
attached to each group, such as the sum of the building area, the sum of the
free space area, the minimum distance between the two buildings, the mean
distance among buildings, etc.

If the source map scale and target map scale are not adjacent, the procedure is

as follows:

. Topological adjacency relations among groups are detected and recorded,
which is exactly the same as the step for local grouping for maps with
adjacent scales. Let the current map scale be equal to Si (originally i~1).
. Calculate the free space areas and the separation between every two adjacent

groups.

. Merge the adjacent groups if their free space area is less than Alimit or their

separation less than Dlimit. Let the current map scale equal Siz1.

. End the procedure if Siz1~St; or else re-calculate and attach the information

to the new groups and go to step 1.

5.2. Detection of topological adjacency relationships

The detection of topological adjacency relationships among polygons, based on
primitives of computational geometry, such as the convex hull, Voronoi diagramme

Figure 4. Construction of an indirect alignment. (a) Direct alignment and (b) indirect
alignment.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 524

Z. Li et al.

and Delaunay Triangulation, has been researched in the GIS community for years
(Gold 1991, Tsai 1993, Herbert and Tan 1993, Zhao et al. 1999, Li et al. 2002). For
this reason, the following discussion will concentrate on the process and principles
of detection, but not on the algorithms from Computational Geometry. This
process consists of four procedures:

. Triangulation: the so-called incremental algorithm (Klein and Meiser 1993) is
used to construct triangulation among buildings, by which two kinds of
triangles are formed. If three points of a triangle belong to the same building,
this triangle is called the ‘building triangle’, or the ‘connection triangle’ if it
links two or three different buildings like a ‘bridge’. The building triangles are
located either within a building or in the concave part of the building
polygon. To detect
the building group, we are only interested in the
connection triangles. The building triangles are useless for detecting adjacency
relationships among buildings, so they are deleted from triangle arrays, and
only connection triangles are retained.

. Adjacency relationships detection: if a vertex of a connection triangle belongs
to a building, this triangle belongs to the building. Hence, every connection
triangle belongs to two or three buildings. Two buildings owning the same
triangles are deﬁned as topologically adjacent, i.e. with an adjacency relation.
. Extraction of building cluster axes: connection triangles between two
buildings are examined to form an axis, which stands for a graphic
separation but logically for a linkage line between two buildings as far as the
topological adjacency relation is concerned. Building cluster axes are very
helpful for visualizing groupings of buildings.
. Construction of an adjacency relation matrix:

if a group consists of N
buildings, an N6N matrix A is used to represent the adjacency relationships
among buildings. If building m and building n (m and n are the sequential
numbers of the two objects in the building set) are adjacent, we deﬁne:

Am,n~1
An,m~1:

Otherwise,

Am,n~0
An,m~0:
Obviously, A is a symmetrical matrix, so that a zero may be assigned to all of
the elements in the lower triangular matrix. Therefore, only the upper
triangular matrix is used in the following discussion. At this stage, the free
space area, the separation (the minimum distance) between the two adjacent
buildings, is calculated and recorded in the corresponding matrix.

5.3. Detection of building alignments

A building alignment is a group of buildings of a similar orientation, size, shape
and approximately equal separation. There are two types of alignments, i.e. direct
and indirect (ﬁgure 4). If two adjacent buildings are perceptually ‘the same’, they
form a direct alignment. A direct alignment exists between two adjacent buildings.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

525

The similarity is evaluated by three parameters—size, shape, and orientation—
usually used in Gestalt experiments.

Basically, if two adjacent buildings are of the same size, shape, and orientation,
a direct alignment is formed between them. But how these factors respectively
contribute to the alignment recognition is difﬁcult to represent quantitatively. For
the sake of simplicity, we will only consider the adjacency relation and orientation.
There are two kinds of direct alignments that can be differentiated among

building groups, i.e. ‘extension alignment’ and ‘parallel alignment’.

. Extension alignment: if the line linking the centroids of the two buildings is
approximately parallel with one of the major axes of the two buildings in an
alignment, this alignment is an extension alignment, as is shown in ﬁgure 3(a).
. Parallel alignment: if an alignment is not an extension alignment, link four
end points of the two major axes to form a simple quadrangle. Select the two
end points of the short major axis as start points, and draw two perpendicular
lines. If none of the perpendicular lines intersects with the longer major axis,
this is a false alignment. Otherwise, if:

Mmax{MminvLlimit, or
Mmax{Mmin
ð

Þ=Mminv1:

This alignment is deﬁned as a parallel alignment (ﬁgure 3b). Here, Mmax is the
length of the longer major axis, and Mmin the length of the shorter one.

After the detection of direct alignments, an N6N matrix D is constructed to
record the direct alignment relations between every two buildings for a building set
with N buildings. An element Di,j may be equal to 0, 1 or 2, representing non-
alignment, extension alignment and parallel alignment relations, respectively.

As each direct alignment consists of only two buildings of the same nature, it is
too fragmental for generalizations to be carried out on them directly. It is then
natural to make the group larger if possible. To do so, the further detection of
strong alignments with a greater number of buildings is required. The result is
termed as indirect alignments here. Indeed, an indirect alignment is the connection
of the same direct alignments (extension or parallel) with a common element
(building), i.e. an indirect alignment is formed by two direct extension alignments
(or parallel alignments) with adjacency relationships. An indirect alignment relation
matrix can easily be built upon the direct alignment relation matrix D. Figure 4 is a
graphic illustration of the construction process of an indirect alignment.

5.4. Post-processing of building alignments

An indirect alignment is a potential group, but it is still too early to apply a
generalization operation to them because some of
them belong to common
buildings (ﬁgure 5). To determine which alignment a common building belongs to in
a generalization, three factors should be considered, i.e. the building number, mean
distance and standard deviation of distance. These three factors, with building
numbers in an ascending sequence and the other two in a descending sequence, are
used to sort all of the indirect alignments. Obviously, the perceptually stronger
indirect alignments are arranged before the weaker ones after sorting. The following

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 526

Z. Li et al.

Figure 5. Two alignments with a common building: common building O1 belongs to the
stronger alignment.

steps are used to determine to which alignment a common building belongs. At the
same time, less useful alignments are deleted from the alignment array.

. Step 1. Take the ﬁrst alignment from the sorted alignment array.
. Step 2. If this alignment owns common elements with other ones in the array,
delete the common elements from the other alignments, and recalculate the
attached information of the other alignments and resort the alignment array.
If an alignment owns only one element, delete this alignment from the array.

. Step 3. If the array is not empty, repeat the procedure from step 1.

Figure 5 gives an illustration of this process. The common building O1 belongs to
the alignment {O1, O3, O4, O5} and {O1, O2}. After the separation process, it
belongs to the former group, and the latter one with only one element is deleted
from the alignment array.

A retained alignment is a resultant group, with strong connection relations by
perception. A formed group means the separation of the buildings from the other
groups. To record the separation, the corresponding elements in the adjacency
relation matrix need to be changed. Check matrix A; if building m and n are not in
a retained alignment and Am,n~1, let Am,n~0, An,m~0.

After the detection of alignment, local groups will have formed. However, many
buildings may still have been left out, due to their irregular orientations. That is, a
further process is needed to group them together in order to generalize these
buildings. In this step, two rules are employed to cluster these buildings:

. If d>Dlimit, Am,n~0, An,m~0; or else Am,n~1, An,m~1.
. if a>Alimit, Am,n~0, An,m~0; or else Am,n~1, An,m~1.

Here, d is the distance between building m and building n; a is the area of free

space between them.

5.5. Formation of local groups

In essence, a building set is a connective graph with buildings as nodes and their
relations (including topological adjacency, separation, free space, size, shape,
orientation, etc.) as edges. After the detection of alignment and non-alignment in
buildings, the grouping information, i.e. the connectivity between two buildings,
will have been recorded in the adjacency relation matrix A. By means of this
matrix, the connective graph can be divided into several subgraphs. Each subgraph
is a building group—a local group. The separation of the matrix A into subgroups
is a very popular process in graph theory, which has been discussed in detail in
many studies (Alan et al. 1993).

The information attached to a resultant group is for the selection of appropriate

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

527

generalization operations and algorithms (operator) for it. Below is a list of the
information items attached to every group, expressed in Visual Czz.

Struct tagAttachedInfo

f

ID;

==group ID

int
int Num;
short alignType; ==alignment type of the group: 0, 1, 2 for non-, parallel,

==building number of the group

and parallel alignments respectively

double SumBArea; ==sum of the building area of the group
double SumFArea; ==sum of the free space area of the group
double MeanDis;

==mean distance of the group

==standard deviation of the distance of the group

double DisDev;
double FareaDev; ==standard deviation of the free space area of the group
double MiniDistance; ==the minimum distance to all adjacent groups

gAttachedInfoStruct;

Because the values of the area of free space and the separation between
buildings have been obtained during the detection of adjacency relations, the
calculation of these attached items is not difﬁcult work. An array G with m
elements (m is the number of the groups) is deﬁned to record the attached
information for all groups.

5.6. Hierarchical structure of building groups: from enclave to neighbourhood

If S1~St, the groups in the local grouping process are the resultant groups.

Otherwise, the following needs to be done to make the groups hierarchical.

(1) Detect and record the topological adjacency relations among groups: to
consider topological consistency, the Voronoi region of each group should
ﬁrst be derived from the triangulation network. The relationship between
the triangulation network and the Voronoi regions is shown in ﬁgure 6. If
two groups own a common Voronoi edge (the thick lines in ﬁgure 7), they

Figure 6. Relationship between a triangulation network and Voronoi regions.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 528

(a)

Z. Li et al.

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 7. Grouping of buildings at 1:10 000 scale for generalization to various scales. (a)
Grouping for generalization to 1:25 000, (b) grouping for generalization to 1:50 000,
(c) grouping for generalization to 1:100 000 and (d) grouping for generalization to
1:250 000.

are deﬁned as being topologically adjacent. The topological adjacency
relations among groups can be easily obtained from the adjacency relations
among individual buildings.

(2) Merge adjacent groups: if two groups are topologically adjacent and own
the same alignment type, and the minimum distance between them is less
than Dlimit (the logical value of Dlimit is calculated by current scale and is S2
at ﬁrst) or the free space area between them is less than Alimit, they are
combined together to form a new group.

(3) Attach the information to each group, as described in Section 5.5.
(4) If the current scale equals St, end the procedure. Or else let current scale
equal S3, recalculate the values of Dlimit and Alimit, and repeat the procedure
from step (2).

Note that in this experiment the Voronoi diagram is constructed on the basis of
skeletons of connection triangles. According to the strict deﬁnition in computation

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

529

geometry, the above construction is not a real Voronoi diagram but it has a similar
property, i.e. equal partitions of the space between buildings equally. From the
point of view of application, it can be used to support the detection of building
group. Indeed, the construction of the Voronoi diagram for polygon clusters rather
than point clusters is difﬁcult. Usually,
the construction methods are only
approximate, such as the raster extension method (Li et al. 1999).

6. Selection of generalization operations to building groups

In this step, appropriate operations are selected to generalize every group.
Aligned building groups are generally typiﬁed; non-aligned ones are simpliﬁed,
eliminated or aggregated according to the attached information.

6.1. Selection of generalization operations for non-aligned building groups

To a non-alignment group Gi, the determination of its generalization operator

follows the rules listed below:

. If Gi.Num~1 and Gi.MiniDistancevDlimit and Gi.SumBAreavAlimit, the

operator is ‘elimination’; otherwise

. If Gi.Num~1 and Gi.SumBArea>Alimit, the operator is ‘simpliﬁcation’;

. If Gi.MeanDiswDlimit or Gi.MeanAreawAlimit, the operator is ‘simpliﬁca-

otherwise

tion’; otherwise

. Operator is ‘aggregation’.

6.2. Selection of the generalization operations for aligned building groups

To an alignment group, the determination of its generalization operator follows

the following rules.

. If Gi.MeanDiswDlimit or Gi.MeanAreawAlimit,

the selected operator is

‘simpliﬁcation’; or else.

. If Gi.Numw2, the selected operator is ‘typiﬁcation’.

To ensure that the local conﬁguration and characteristics of each building group
are consistent before and after typiﬁcation, an iterative process is designed to
calculate the separation, length and width of N buildings in an alignment group in
the following steps:

(1) Calculate the sum length of the linear scattered alignment.
(2) Let the resultant building number in the group equal N, calculate the

separation, length and width of the buildings.

(3) If the separation is >Dlimit and the orientation of major axes is consistent
with the original ones, end the process; or let the resultant building number
in the group equal N–1, and repeat step 2 until step 3 is satisﬁed.

When a group is typiﬁed, the ﬁrst and last buildings are arranged at their
original positions to ensure the preservation of the group structure. The other
buildings are then ﬁlled between the gaps.

After all of the groups are generalized, the generalization constraints within
each group have been resolved. However, between different groups, the conﬂicts

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 530

Z. Li et al.

among buildings may still exist and will need to be detected and solved. For this
purpose, the generalized buildings are triangulated again to detect spatial relations
among buildings, and a compromise method, i.e. reducing the areas or moving
positions of the conﬂict objects, is used to settle the dilemmas.

7. Practical example

To demonstrate the method discussed in previous sections, an example is
presented for purposes of evaluation. Indeed, the evaluation of generalization
results is a very difﬁcult issue. The adequacy of a generalization result is dependent
on various factors such as the algorithms and constraints used to select the
algorithms and operations. The emphasis here is on the use of urban morphology
and Gestalt theory for the formation of constraints for grouping buildings in urban
areas. Therefore, two parameters should be considered, i.e. (1) the adequacy of the
groupings and (2) the adequacy of the decision automatically to make a particular
generalization operation (e.g. aggregation).
In other words, how good an
aggregation/or typiﬁcation algorithm is will not be discussed here.

The original dataset is from a developed city on the mainland of China. The
scale of the source map is 1:10 000. There are 66 buildings in the source map. The
target map scales are 1:25 000, 1:50 000, 1:100 000 and 1:250 000. Figure 7 shows the
grouping process. The triangulation network and clustered groups are given as
Voronoi regions. The generalized results are shown in ﬁgure 8.

For the purpose of this study, the generalization results can be evaluated using
parameters at three levels, i.e. the characteristics of individual groups, the relation
alteration among the groups, and the harmony of the whole map before and after
generalization.

Using the proposed method for generalization, the ratios between the building
area and the free space area, orientation relations and distance relations are
preserved for buildings in every group before and after generalization.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 8. Generalization of grouped buildings to various scales. (a) For 1:25 000 scale, by
typiﬁcation, (b) for 1:50 000 scale, by typiﬁcation and aggregation, (c) for 1:100 000
scale, by aggregation operation, and (d) for 1:250 000 scale, by aggregation operation.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

531

The preservation of relations among groups ensures the harmony of a
neighbourhood (or superblock, block and enclave) before and after generalization.
Its consistency is an important index for assessing the quality of generalization on a
higher level. To evaluate the results, a global estimator, SumDev, is designed as
follows:

SumDev~ X

abs i{j
ð

Þ,

where abs(k) is the absolute value of K, i is Gi.ID’s position in array G, j is Gi.ID’s
position in array H, G is an array G for recording the information of the groups
before generalization, in which all elements are sorted in ascending order by the
sum of the building area, sum of the space area, mean distance and building
number of each group, and H is the counterpart of G for recording the same
information for all groups after generalization.

If SumDev~0, obviously the result is ideal on the level of the neighbourhoods,

superblocks and blocks; otherwise, the larger the SumDev, the worse the result.

After the generalization of the buildings, the topological relations among them
are maintained. The partitioned neighbourhoods, superblocks, blocks and enclaves
can be correctly and harmonically embedded on the target map with these arteries
of cities after this step, by which the harmony of a generalized map is ensured.

Using these parameters as criteria, an evaluation of the generalized maps by
the proposed method is presented in table 4. It is concluded that the proposed
methodology works well.

8. Conclusions

This paper has presented a method for building groupings and then
generalizations. The method makes use of
the concepts developed in urban
morphology for the global organization of the building groups and the formation
of hierarchies. The neighbourhood model in urban morphology provides global
constraints for guiding the global partitioning of buildings set on the map as a
whole by means of roads (and/or rivers), by which enclaves, blocks, superblocks or
neighbourhoods are formed. Local constraints are formed from Gestalt principles
and provide the criteria for the further grouping of enclaves, blocks, superblocks or
neighbourhoods. After the grouping, some useful information, such as the sum of
the building area, mean separation and standard deviation of the separations, is
attached to each group. By making use of the attached information, an appropriate
operation is selected to generalize a building group.

Table 4. Evaluation of the example.

Characteristic of
individual groups

Map
scale

Group
number

Building
number

Ratio between
building area and
free space area

Separation
relations

Group
sequence

Harmony
of the
whole
map

1:25 000
1:50 000
1:100 000
1:250 000

19
11
6
1

53
29
6
1

no change
no change
slightly changed
slightly changed

slightly changed no change
slightly changed no change
slightly changed no change
no change

changed

yes
yes
yes
yes

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 532

Z. Li et al.

Building grouping is a critical step for building generalization. This is due to the
difﬁculty involved in the detection and analysis of spatial information because some
critical information is fuzzy and not easy to quantify, and is even unclear to people.
As summarized by one of the reviewers, this paper ‘brings together some well
developed ﬁelds of research (graph theory, Delaunay triangulation, Voronoi
diagram, urban morphology, and Gestalt theory) in such a way that multi-scale
products could be derived’. This adds another possible solution to the existing list.
Note that the methodology described herein is so far solely based on geometric
analysis. That is, the semantic/thematic aspect of the buildings has not been
considered. Indeed,
the resultant groups, which are very
reasonable based on the geometric analysis, may no longer be reasonable if
semantic/thematic meanings are considered. It is also worthy of note that in this
study, an implicit assumption of convex buildings is made. Therefore, there is a
potential difﬁculty in dealing with U-type buildings and other buildings with
complex shapes. Based on Gestalt principles, the factors having an impact on the
recognition of building alignment have been listed. But how to integrate all types of
impact to build a proper algorithm to detect building patterns as a cartographer
does is difﬁcult and is a subject for future work.

is possible that

it

Acknowledgements

Work was substantially supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Project No. PolyU 5073/01E).

References
AI, T., and LIU, Y., 2002, A method of point cluster simpliﬁcation with spatial distribution
[in

properties preserved. Acta Geodaetica et Cartographica Sinica, 31, 175–181.
Chinese]

ALAN, G., GILBERT, J. R., and LIU, W. H., 1993, Graph Theory and Sparse Matrix

Computation (New York: Springer).

ANDERS, K. H., and SESTER, M., 2000, Parameter-free cluster detection in spatial databases
and its application to typiﬁcation. ISPRS Archives for Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing, Vol. 23, Part 4 (CD-ROM).

BADER, M., and WEIBEL, R., 1997, Detecting and resolving size and proximity conﬂicts in
the 18th International

the generalisation of polygon maps. In Proceedings of
Cartographic Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 1525–1532.

BARRAULT, M., REGNAULD, N., DUCHE¯ NE, C., HAIRE, K., BAEIJS, C., DEMAZEAU, Y.,
HARDY, P., MACKANESS, W., RUAS, A., and WEIBEL, R., 2001, Integrating multi-
agent, object-oriented and algorithmic techniques for improved automated map
generalization. In Proceedings of the 20th International Cartographic Conference,
Beijing, China, pp. 2110–2116.

BEINES, M., 1993, Treating of area features concerning the derivation of digital cartographic
models. In Proceedings of International Cartographic Conference’93, Bournemonth,
UK, pp. 372–382.

BOFFET, A., and SERRA, S. R., 2001, Identiﬁcation of spatial structures within urban blocks
for town characterization. In Proceedings of the 20th International Cartographic
Conference, Beijing, China (CD-ROM).

CHRISTENSEN, A. H. J., 1999, Cartographic line generalization with waterlines and medial-

axes. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 26, 19–32.

CHRISTOPHE, S., and RUAS, A., 2002, Detecting building alignment for generalization
purpose. In Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Spatial Data
Handling, Ottawa, Canada.

DE BERG, M., VAN KREVELD, M., and SCHIRRA, S., 1995, A new approach to subdivision

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 Automated building generalization

533

simpliﬁcation. In Proceedings of Auto-Carto, 12 (American Congress on Surveying
and Mapping, Bethesda), pp. 79–88.

DOUGLAS, D. H., and PEUCKER, T. K., 1973, Algorithms for the reduction of the number of
points required to represent a digitised line or its caricature. Canadian Cartographer,
10, 112–122.

EGENHOFER, M., and FRANZOSA, R., 1991, Point-set

topological

spatial

relations.

International Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 5, 161–174.

GALANDA, M., and WEIBEL, R., 2002, An agent-based framework for polygonal subdivision
generalization. In Proceedings of Spatial Data Handling 2002, Ottawa, Canada (CD-
ROM).

GOLD, C. M., 1991, Problem with handling spatial data—the Voronoi approach. CISM

Journal, 45, 65–80.

HARRIE, L., 2002, A case study of simultaneous generalization. In Proceedings of 10th
International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, Ottawa, Canada (CD-ROM).
HERBERT, E., and TAN, T., 1993, An upper bound for conforming Delaunay triangulations.

Discrete and Computational Geometry, 10, 197–213.

KLEIN, R. M., and MEISER, S., 1993, Randomized incremental construction of abstract
Voronoi diagrams. International Journal of Computational Geometry and Applications,
3, 157–184.

LI, C., CHEN, J., and LI, Z. L., 1999, A raster-based algorithm for computing Voronoi
diagrams of spatial objects using dynamic distance transformation. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13, 209–225.

LI, Z. L., 1995, An examination of algorithms for the detection of critical points on digital

cartographic lines. Cartographic Journal, 32, 121–125.

LI, Z. L., and OPENSHAW, S., 1992, Algorithms for automated line generalization based on a
natural principle of objective generalization. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems, 6, 373–389.

LI, Z. L., and OPENSHAW, S., 1993, A natural principle for objective generalization of digital

map data. Cartography and Geographic Information Systems, 20, 19–29.

LI, Z. L., and SU, B., 1995, From phenomena to essence: envisioning the nature of digital

map generalisation. Cartographic Journal, 32, 45–47.

LI, Z. L., and SU, B., 1996, Algebraic models for feature displacement in the generalisation of
digital map data using morphological techniques. Cartographica, 32, 39–56.
LI, Z. L., ZHAO, R., and CHEN, J., 2002, A Voronoi-based spatial algebra for spatial

relations. Progress in Natural Science, 12, 528–536.

LICHTNER, W., 1979, Computer assisted processes of cartographic generalization in

topographic maps. Geo-Processing, 1, 183–199.

MCMASTER, R., and SHEA, K. S., 1989, Cartographic generalization in digital environment:
when and how to generalize. In Proceedings of Auto-Carto 9, American Congress on
Surveying and Mapping, Fall Church, pp. 56–67.

MCMASTER, R., and SHEA, K. S., 1992, Generalization in Digital Cartography. Resource
Publications in Geography (Washington DC: Association of America Geographers).
MONMONIER, M., 1983, Raster-mode area generalisation for land use and land cover maps.

MU¨ LLER, J. C., and WANG, Z. S., 1992, Area-patch generalisation: a competitive approach.

PALMER, S. E., 1992, Common region: a new principle of perceptual grouping. Cognitive

Cartographica, 20, 65–91.

Cartographic Journal, 29, 137–144.

Psychology, 24, 436–447.

PALMER, S. E., and ROCK, I., 1994, Rethinking perceptual organization: the role of uniform

connectedness. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 1, 515–519.

PATRICIOS, N. N., 2002, Urban design principles of the original neighbourhood concepts.

Urban Morphology, 6, 21–32.

PLAZANET, C., 1995, Measurements, characterisation, and classiﬁcation for automated line
feature generalisation. In Proceedings of the ACSM/ASPRS Annual Convention and
Exposition, ACSM/ASPRS, Falls Church, volume 4, pp. 59–68.

RAINSFORD, D., and MACKNESS, W., 2002, Template matching in support of generalisation
of rural buildings. Proceedings of 10th International Symposium on Spatial Data
Handling. Ottawa, Canada (CD-ROM).

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 534

Automated building generalization

REGNAULD, N., 1996, Recognition of building clusters for generalization. Advances in GIS II,
edited by M. Molennar and M.-J. Kraak (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 185–198.
REGNAULD, N., 2001, Contextual building typiﬁcation in automated map generalization.

Algorithmica, 30, 312–333.

ROBINSON, G., and LEE, F., 1994, An automated generalisation system for large-scale
topographic maps. In Innovations in GIS 1, edited by M. Worboys (London: Taylor
& Francis), pp. 53–64.

ROCK, I., 1996, Indirect Perception (London: MIT Press).
RUAS, A., and PLAZANET, C., 1996, Strategies for automated generalisation. Proceedings of

Spatial Data Handling, 6.1–6.18.

RUAS, A., 2001, Automating the generalization of geographical data. In Proceedings of the
20th International Cartographic Conference. Beijing, China, pp. 1943–1953.
SCHYLBERG, L., 1992a, Rule-based Area Generalization of Digital Topographic Maps.

Technical Report (Lantmateriet-Sweden).

SCHYLBERG, L., 1992b, Cartographic amalgamation of area objects. In Proceedings of the
4th Scandinavian Research Conference on GIS, Helsinki University of Technology,
pp. 135–138.

SCHYLBERG, L., 1993, Computational methods for generalisation of cartographic data in a

raster environment. Doctoral thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.

SESTER, M., 2000, Generalization based on least squares adjustment. International Archives
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 33, Part B4, Amsterdam (CD-ROM).
SU, B., and LI, Z. L., 1995, An algebraic basis for digital generalisation of area-patches based

on morphological techniques. Cartographic Journal, 32, 148–153.

SU, B., and LI, Z., 1997, Morphological transformation for detecting spatial conﬂicts in
digital generalisation. In Proceedings of International Cartographic Congress’97,
vol. 1, pp. 460–468.

SU, B., LI, Z. L., and LODWICK, G., 1997a, Morphological

transformation for the

elimination of area features in digital map generalisation. Cartography, 26, 23–30.

SU, B., LI, Z. L., LODWICK, G., and MULLER, J. C., 1997b, Algebraic models for the
aggregation of area features based on morphological operators. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 11, 233–246.

TSAI, V., 1993, Fast topological construction of Delaunay triangulations and Voronoi

diagrams. Computers and Geosciences, 19, 1463–1474.

VAN KREVELD, M., 1995, Efﬁcient settlement selection for interactive display. In Proceedings
of AutoCarto 12, American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, Bethesda, MD,
pp. 287–296.

WANG, Z. S., and MU¨ LLER, J. C., 1992, Complex coastline generalisation. Cartography and

Geographic Information Systems, 20, 96–106.

WARE, J. M., and JONES, C. B., 1998, Conﬂict reduction in map generalisation using iterative

improvement. Geoinformatica, 2, 383–407.

WEIBEL, R., 1996, A typology of constraints to line simpliﬁcation. Advances on GIS II, edited

by M. J. Kraak and M. Molenaar (London: Taylor & Francis), pp. 9A.1–9A.14.

WERTHEIMER, M., 1923, Law of organization in perceptual forms. In A Source Book of
Gestalt Psychology, edited by W. D. Ellis (Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner), pp. 71–88.
YUKIO, S., 1997, Cluster perception in the distribution of point objects. Cartographica, 34,

49–61.

ZHANG, G., and TULIP, J., 1990, An algorithm for the avoidance of sliver polygons and
clusters of points in spatial overlay. In Proceedings of 4th International Symposium
on Spatial Data Handling, Zurich, Switzerland, vol. 1, pp. 141–150.

ZHAO, R., CHEN, J., and LI, Z., 1999, Deﬁne and describe spatial adjacency with Voronoi
distance. In Proceedings of Joint ISPRS Commission Workshop on Dynamic and
Multi-dimensional GIS, Beijing, China, pp. 77–82.

Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 13:38 19 October 2014 