DOI: 10.1111/tgis.12537  

R E S E A R C H   A R T I C L E

Geospatial preparedness: Empirical study of 
the joint effort to provide geospatial support to 
disaster response

Roberto San Martin  |   Marco Painho

NOVA Information Management School, 
Lisbon, Portugal

Abstract

Correspondence
Roberto San Martin, NOVA Information 
Management School, Campus de 
Campolide, Lisbon 1070‐312, Portugal.
Email: robertosm@gmx.com

In a disaster aftermath in places lacking geospatial prepar‐

edness, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of 

Humanitarian  Affairs  creates  a  framework  for  coopera‐

tion  with  the  Coordinated  Data  Scramble  initiative,  where 

Information  Management  Officers  (IMOs)  from  different 

organizations  work  together  in  supporting  the  coordina‐

tion  of  humanitarian  aid.  The  perspective  of  these  IMOs 

has been considered to identify the factors influencing the 

use  of  GIS  in  this  context.  The  results  show  the  require‐

ment for a geodata management strategy, including geodata 

gathering,  maintenance,  and  decision‐making  processes 

based  on  those  geodata.  Geodata  should  be  reliable  and 

up‐to‐date. It requires consistent and useful metadata and 

the  possibility  of  contacting  the  geodata  source.  Security 

and political issues limit information sharing. In this context, 

OpenStreetMap  is  often  used  as  a  source  of  information. 

Therefore,  improving  OpenStreetMap  improves  geospatial 

preparedness. Nevertheless, the use of this open platform 

highlights issues related to information privacy.

1 |  I NTRO D U C TI O N A N D BAC KG RO U N D O N TH E CO O R D I N ATI O N   O F 
I N FO R M ATI O N  M A N AG E M E NT I N D I SA S TE R R E S P O N S E

On October 3, 2016, category 4 Hurricane Matthew was 440 km southwest from Port‐au‐Prince (Haiti). Two days 

later, it swept toward the Bahamas, pummeling Haiti. On October 4, 2016, 44 Information Management Officers 

(IMOs) from United Nations (UN) institutions and partner organizations received an activation email due to the 

Transactions in GIS. 2019;23:481–494. 

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tgis 

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd  |  481

482  |    

expected effects of the hurricane. The call was part of a pre‐agreed procedure with those agencies and partners 

which  form  part  of  the  Information  Management  Working  Group  that  have  expressed  interest  in  participating 

in the joint situation and needs analysis (OCHA CASS, 2016). This initiative was a first step to creating an infor‐

mation  management  group  to  share  data  and  information  to  achieve  a  joint  multi‐sectoral  analysis  to  launch  a 

Flash Appeal to fund the disaster response. An officer from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 

Affairs (OCHA) was appointed as the focal point. A Skype room was established to facilitate the coordination of 

the support to IMOs deployed on the field as part of a UN Disaster Assessment and Coordination team. Within 

minutes, a Trello board with public access was created by the Coordinated Data Scramble. Other tools (i.e. Dropbox, 

Google Drive) would follow shortly. The call cascaded through IMOs from different organizations to expand the 

support. Within a week, 45 personnel from 22 organizations were actively participating in the Skype room from 

an overall workforce of 70 from 30 organizations (during the West African 2014–2015 Ebola outbreak 232 peo‐

ple, from 92 organizations, were actively participating) (Moore, 2016). The call was open to any institution with 

the demonstrated capacity to process and analyze data and information. They included several OCHA sections, 

national and international agencies, UN clusters, networks or consortiums of agencies, research institutions and 

academia, non‐governmental organizations (NGOs), volunteer networks, and the private sector. The work of this 

group was to be considered within the framework of the Multi‐Cluster/Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA) and 

the Humanitarian Needs Overview established by the Inter‐Agency Standing Committee. The target was to pro‐

duce an operational picture from primary (i.e. field data) and secondary (i.e. pre‐crisis and in‐crisis data) sources, 

including a baseline situation analysis drawn on the most recent pre‐crisis information. The outcomes were to be 

presented in a Preliminary Scenario Definition (within 72 hours) and a MIRA Report (after two weeks). The MIRA 

Analytical Framework establishes the information priorities (i.e. scope and scale of the crisis, conditions of the 

affected population, capacities and response, and humanitarian access) (Inter‐Agency Standing Committee, 2015). 

During this period, when major decisions are taken, there is a high demand for, and a low supply of, information 

(Lovon & Austin, 2016). The first files made available through the Coordinated Data Scramble were geospatial 

information (i.e. Haiti Administrative Boundaries uploaded to Humanitarian Data Exchange [HDX]). Using GIS to 

analyze the population in those administrative divisions located in the track of the hurricane would provide a first 

estimation of the magnitude of the disaster.

Making this pre‐disaster geodata available was a precondition of using GIS to facilitate the disaster‐response 

decision‐making  process.  Geospatial  preparedness  is  a  complex  concept,  commonly  implemented  in  developed 

countries; there are political support and regulations available to create institutions, with tools and trained people 

to gather, share, and use the geodata (DHS, 2014). The different approach to geospatial preparedness across the 

world  creates  inequality;  while  information  is  readily  available  in  countries  with  a  high  level  of  geospatial  pre‐

paredness, in many disaster‐prone areas the geographical element of information is not considered. Therefore, 

geospatial pre‐disaster information does not exist. This lack of geospatial preparedness hinders emergency re‐

sponse coordination (San Martin & Painho, 2016). In those places, international organizations provide coordina‐

tion, information management, and emergency funding. The rapid appraisal of the disaster magnitude compared 

to local capacities leads to the deployment of international humanitarian aid coordinated by OCHA (San Martin, 

2014). On October 4, 2016, the multifaceted team described above was assembled to provide the necessary in‐

formation, overcoming the limitations caused by the lack of geospatial preparedness in Haiti.

There are few academic works on the use of GIS in humanitarian missions. In addition, these studies do not ad‐

dress the actual framework in which more partners are able to create and handle geospatial information. Therefore, 

the scope of this empirical study is to understand the management of geographic information by the international 

humanitarian community in places where reliable information is not readily available. Previous studies were miss‐

ing  the  perspective  of  the  people  deciding  which  information  was  used  and  how  it  would  be  used.  Eventually, 

the information used to address the lack of geospatial preparedness depends not only on procedures and logic, 

but also on subjective decisions. Therefore, the objective is to analyze the opinion of IMOs, providing an inside 

practical view on the process leading to the identification and validation of information that is made available to 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  483

decision‐makers in humanitarian missions. The purpose of the study is to answer the following questions: How do 

IMOs taking part in international cooperation for disaster response address the lack of reliable pre‐disaster geo‐

graphic information? Moreover, could the identification of the methods used, and the issues and constraints found 

in this process, bring potential short‐term solutions to address the lack of geospatial preparedness? Ultimately, the 

research aims to establish areas of further research to identify potential long‐term sustainable solutions.

The  present  study  does  not  aim  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the  actual  system  in  place,  but  rather  to 

provide  an  inside  view  and  identify  the  issues  originated  due  to  the  lack  of  reliable  pre‐disaster  information. 

Moreover, it is acknowledged that geospatial preparedness is a more complex concept, including institutions and 

regulations, tools and the people who use them. Furthermore, providing those would be related to capacity build‐

ing, which is outside the scope of this research.

2 |  M E TH O D O LO G Y

The  research  is  grounded  on  a  multi‐method  strategy  (Denscombe,  2014),  including  a  literature  review,  semi‐

structured individual interviews with information managers, and study of the tools used to coordinate the support 

(i.e. Skype room, Google Docs, and Trello boards and datasets uploaded to HDX). It followed a supplementary 

literature review on the topics identified during the analysis of the interviews.

The interview guide was drafted based on the review of previous related works and the characteristics of the tar‐

get population of the study (i.e. IMOs with experience during international disaster response operations). A purposive 

sampling technique, followed by snowball sampling, was used to select key informants covering the different profiles 

for on‐field  and remote IMOs from the main stakeholders, as shown in Table 1: UN institutions at local, regional, 

and headquarters level (OCHA and High Commissioner for Refugees) and NGOs from volunteers to management 

level (Digital Humanitarians, MapAction, and GISCorps). All participants fulfilled the condition of having participated 

as IMOs in international disaster response operations in the last 5 years. Eight semi‐structured interviews, with an 

approximate duration of 60 minutes each, were completed via Skype in 2016 and 2017. This sample was considered 

adequate given the size of the target population (i.e. 9% of the IMOs involved in response to Hurricane Matthew 

were interviewed), together with the key positions of the IMOs interviewed (i.e. NGO Volunteers, NGO Founder and 

Director, Coordinated Data Scramble organizer, UN Consultant, UN GIS Coordinator, UN Data Systems Analyst, and 

UN Head of Unit) and the overall methodology of the research, not relying merely on the interviews.

All participants were expressing their personal opinions and not necessarily the official views of their insti‐

tutions. Therefore, the identity of the interviewees, including details of their specific roles, are not revealed to 

preserve confidentiality. Furthermore, to ensure the ethical use of data from research participants, the general 

ideas expressed during the interviews are cited using the letter “P” followed by an assigned number. In addition, 

italics and quotation marks are used to denote an exact quote of the participant's words.

TA B L E   1  Characterization of the participants in the study identified by a P followed by a number indicting 
the chronological order in which the interview was conducted to ensure the ethical use of data from research 
participants

P1

UN

Head 
office

P2

NGO

P3

UN

Volunteer 

Local 

& 
manager

office

P4

UN

Head 
office

P5

UN

Local 

office

P6

NGO

Volunteer

P7

UN

Head 
office

P8

NGO

Volunteer& 
manager

Field & 

Field & 

Field & 

Field & 

Field & 

remote 
support

remote 
support

remote 
support

remote 
support

remote 
support

Remote 
support

Field & 

remote 
support

Remote 
support

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO484  |    

Each participant was presented with the same questions. Interviews were recorded, transcribed, and coded 

manually following an inductive approach. Interview outcomes were never discussed with other participants to 

avoid influencing individual opinions. The interview guide was the result of a literature review described in a pre‐

ceding article. The initial phase of the research considered seven a priori codes for topics directly introduced in the 

interviews. The results of their analysis were also presented in the aforementioned article (San Martin & Painho, 

2018). In addition, grounded coding of the interviews defined a list of recurrent topics referred to by the IMOs. 

The analysis of these topics is presented in the current article. Each topic is exemplified by a selection of quotes 

from the interviews. In order to facilitate the analysis, the topics were grouped into two themes.

The initial results of the study were validated, considering the 11 topics identified within the tools used for the 

coordination of support to on‐field IMOs. These tools were monitored during the actual response (i.e. Hurricane 

Matthew in Haiti in October 2016) and a posteriori (i.e. Cyclone Winston in Fiji in February 2016 and the Ecuador 

earthquake in April 2016). Upon invitation, the Skype room for the response to Hurricane Matthew was mon‐

itored  daily  from  October  14,  2016  to  November  4,  2016  (the  chat  history  was  studied  from  its  creation  on 

October 4, 2016). The Trello board (shown in Figure 1), documents shared through Google Docs, and datasets that 

were uploaded to HDX were followed in parallel. It should be noted that four of the members of the Hurricane 

Matthew emergency response team had been interviewed as part of the study. The response to Cyclone Winston 

and the Ecuador earthquake were studied through the Trello boards and datasets that were uploaded to HDX. The 

identified topics of common reference were also the basis for a supplementary literature review.

3 |  FR A M E WO R K A N D R E L ATE D WO R K

There are few academic works related to the practical application of GIS to humanitarian aid. Tomaszewski, Judex, 

Szarzynski,  Radestock,  and  Wirkus  (2015)  provide  a  general  overview  of  GIS  for  disaster  response.  The  main 

F I G U R E   1  Coordinated Data Scramble Trello board used during the response to Hurricane Matthew in Haiti 
showing the general instructions on the use of the board, the information needs (to‐do), the work in progress 
(doing), and the data identified (done)

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  485

actors  and  concepts  used  in  the  present  study  are  described  within  this  state‐of‐the‐art  report.  The  work  of 

Miyazaki,  Nagai,  and  Shibasaki  (2015)  reviews  geospatial  technologies  for  disaster  risk  management  and  their 

applications. Boccardo and Tonolo (2015) provide an overview of the use of remote sensing, mainly satellite, for 

disaster response, including techniques, international initiatives, and limitations. However, only the research of 

Soden and Palen (2016) considers the opinion of information managers about the use of GIS for the coordination 

of humanitarian aid, with a particular focus on OpenStreetMap. In addition, the most relevant works specifically 

related to preparedness are the Data Preparedness Framework developed by van den Homberg, Visser, and van 

der Veen (2017) within the Netherlands Red Cross 510 project and Raymond and Al Achkar’s (2017) work for the 

Harvard Humanitarian Initiative. In both works, there is a strong geospatial component.

Remote sensing (i.e. satellite, aerial, unmanned aerial vehicles) has become an essential data source. Several in‐

ternational initiatives provide access to this type of information: the INSPIRE initiative and Copernicus Programme 

or Group on Earth Observation/Global Earth Observation System of Systems, Sentinel Asia, International Charter, 

UNITAR/UNOSAT, USGS Emergency Response, SERVIR, GEO GSNL, and Global Disaster Alert and Coordination 

System (Miyazaki et al., 2015). The ubiquity of remote sensing, together with advances in volunteered geographic 

information (VGI) and WebGIS, are influencing production and data sharing. As a result, institutions are evolving 

from a source of information to a coordination point between relief agencies and volunteers (Kawasaki, Berman, & 

Guan, 2013; Meier, 2015). Patrick Meier's book provides an inside view of the first steps of “Digital Humanitarian” 

work and the integration of that VGI in the institutional system (Meier, 2015). The new role of VGI in disaster 

response has been portrayed in studies looking for a bottom‐up approach to data sharing in opposition to the tra‐

ditional top‐down method. In this context, VGI and open standards are commonly linked to data sharing (Poorazizi, 

Hunter, & Steiniger, 2015).

The use of geospatial big data presents numerous challenges; nevertheless, it also opens up several research op‐

portunities (Robinson et al., 2017), particularly when it is applied to disaster management (Qadir et al., 2016). Crisis 

mapping, the processing of big data by volunteers in response to an emergency, represents a new paradigm for the 

humanitarian community (Givoni, 2016). When considering the application of different forms of crowdsourced infor‐

mation such as VGI (See et al., 2016), studies state the potential of this source of information in disaster response but 

also challenges such as data quality, bias in contributions, data management, and security issues (Haworth & Bruce, 

2015).  OpenStreetMap,  particularly  Humanitarian  OpenStreetMap  Team  (HOT),  applies  the  principles  of  open 

source and open data sharing to humanitarian aid (Dittus, Quattrone, & Capra, 2017; Givoni, 2016; Poiani, Rocha, 

Degrossi,  &  de  Albuquerque,  2016;  See  et  al.,  2016;  Soden  &  Palen,  2016).  As  Neis  and  Zielstra’s  (2014)  review 

shows, research related to OpenStreetMap has been focused on data quality and contributor patterns. Numerous 

papers have studied the level of accuracy through different methods (Basiri et al., 2016; Eckle & de Albuquerque, 

2015; Sehra, Singh, & Rai, 2017), with reliability being one of the main concerns regarding this platform.

In general, the work of crowdsourced mapping is positively assessed. OpenStreetMap has been considered 

to have the potential to be a reliable geographic open data platform (Westrope, Banick, & Levine, 2014). During 

the 2014 West African Ebola epidemic, the UN recognized that “good information” was necessary for the coordi‐

nation of humanitarian aid. Among many challenges, the lack of geospatial preparedness was at the center of the 

problem. To solve the issue, Medecins sans Frontiers (MsF) and Red Cross International decided to crowdsource 

the task of mapping newly infected areas, relying on HOT and Missing Maps (Koch, 2015). HOT work was also 

significant in response to the 2015 Nepal earthquake and other major disasters (Dittus et al., 2017; Givoni, 2016; 

Poiani et al., 2016). The Missing Maps project was initiated by HOT together with MsF, the British Red Cross, and 

the American Red Cross in 2014. Missing Maps aims to improve geospatial preparedness using volunteers and 

OpenStreetMap (Herfort, Eckle, & de Albuquerque, 2016). The objective is to work in geospatial preparedness, 

mapping vulnerable places in the developing world, so information is ready for the humanitarian community if a 

disaster occurs. MsF considers Missing Maps a clear added value in the field (Gray, Stringer, & Jobanputra, 2017). 

Missing Maps has been analyzed in several research works (de Albuquerque, Herfort, & Eckle, 2016). The discon‐

nection between local communities and mappers brings concerns about the necessary maintenance and updating 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO486  |    

of the datasets. The transition from crisis mapping to sustainable and locally owned community mapping is only 

possible with the engagement of the community (Soden & Palen, 2014). Capacity building is needed to deliver 

long‐term cartographic solutions (Turk, 2016). Consequently, Missing Maps also works on capacity building with 

NGOs and local communities (Missing Maps, 2017).

Fewer studies consider the implications of openly distributing data that might include sensitive information. 

Security issues are a general concern for information published through participatory platforms, especially when 

used  at  conflict  zones  where  disclosing  information  could  put  people  at  risk  (van  den  Homberg  &  Neef,  2015; 

Tilanus,  2016).  Christian  Bittner's  research  on  OpenStreetMap  in  Israel  and  Palestine  shows  different  aspects 

of this issue: security concerns about the location of military areas, political implications of conflicting borders, 

different designation of locations, language issues, and national inequities (Bittner, 2017).

Within the UN, the Secretary‐General acknowledged the importance and evolution of geospatial information 

management,  proposing  to  rename  the  Cartographic  Section  as  the  Geospatial  Information  Section.  In  paral‐

lel, a self‐described “identity crisis” is recognized by the fact that this section was relocated several times (UN, 

2015)  until  being  placed  in  the  Information  &  Communications  Technology  Division  within  the  Department  of 

Field Support. Political challenges are identified as a limiting factor in the use of remote sensing and geospatial 

information by the UN institutions, especially in sensitive operations such as those within the UN peacekeeping 

framework (Convergne & Snyder, 2015). The disconnection between information managers and decision makers 

also limits the use of GIS by UN institutions. Decision makers are not aware of what IMOs can do for them using 

GIS. Moreover, the information flow does not always take the right information to the appropriate decision maker 

(Convergne & Snyder, 2015). The Strategic Framework on Geospatial Information and Services for Disasters 2016–

2030, drafted by the UN‐GGIM Working Group on Geospatial Information and Services for Disasters, identifies 

data management as one of the priorities to be addressed. One of the targets related to this priority is to obtain 

complete, updated, and validated datasets. In addition to data development, it also pursues the setting of data 

standards and protocols, and data use guidelines. This document also acknowledges the need to engage the Open 

Data  Community  (WG‐Disasters  UN‐GGIM,  2016b).  The  UN‐GGIM  foresees  the  importance  of  crowdsourced 

geospatial information, open source and open standards in the different editions of their reports on future trends 

in geospatial information management (Carpenter & Snell, 2013; Norris, 2015). A UN Strategic Framework is also 

necessary to provide geospatial information for disaster management (WG‐Disasters UN‐GGIM, 2016a).

Finally, the Coordinated Data Scramble project is OCHA's invaluable partner to provide a coordinated data‐sharing 

framework in which everybody uses the same data for each particular topic. “Scrambles” was initiated during the 2011 

crisis in the Horn of Africa. Social networks such as Skype, Slack, or Telegram are used to communicate and coordinate, 

in combination with other collaborative tools like Google Docs and Trello. Scrambled datasets are usually uploaded to 

the HDX (Campbell, 2017; van den Homberg, 2017; Verity, 2017). Roxane Moore presented a summary at the GeOnG 

Forum, with detailed analyses of how digital collaborative spaces were used, the number of messages, signal‐to‐noise 

ratios, and type of exchanged datasets that have been the basis for the study of these tools here (Moore, 2016).

4 |  FI N D I N G S A N D D I S CU S S I O N

The analysis of the interviews defined a list of recurrent topics referred to by the IMOs. Figure 2 lists the number 

of occurrences in which each topic was coded. In order to facilitate the analysis, the topics were grouped into two 

themes: data management strategy and geographic information/use of GIS.

4.1 | Topics related to data management strategy

For a better understanding of the analysis methodology, examples of the different codes considered within this 

theme are gathered in Table 2. The percentage of interviews with occurrences of each topic is indicated in Figure 3.

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  487

F I G U R E   2  List of variables that were considered relevant because of the recurrence during the interviews 
and the number of occurrences that each one was coded

TA B L E   2  Examples of variables related to data management strategy

Variables

Examples

Data sharing

Data 

reliability

Cleaning 
datasets

P7: “The data is out there; you just need to find it. Everything you can do to encourage sharing in open 
source, like HDX, would be ideal. In that way, everybody would know that the data exists. If the infor‐
mation is not directly shared, the government could list the information available so everybody can 
contact them to request it.”

P2: “Reliability is an issue. It will become more important with the increase in information available. 
It is also important for the responders whether the information is a ‘best guess’ or actual contrasted 
information.” 
P4: “Even official information is not really reliable… Sometimes you wonder whether the administrative 
boundaries you have are the latest version… The ones you get from the statistics office may be differ‐
ent from those from the department of internal affairs…”

Data 

P4: “Maintenance of the datasets is essential. There is a need to have a system in place, a cycle, to 

maintenance

update those datasets. The standards are there.”

P5: “Cleaning and maintaining the datasets is as important as data gathering. It would be important to 

check with the local government for new data on a regular basis, 6 months to 1‐year frequency.” 
P4: “The fact that there is not a single point of truth for administrative boundaries at the beginning 
of an operation is a major problem, for example people using data with different spelling of the admin 
names, different versions with a different number of admin units. […] This is a problem that does not 
take much attention. People expect the IMOs to do fancy analysis. It is not easy to understand the 
time‐consuming task that is ‘fixing’ datasets, cleaning data, copy‐pasting a string of numbers in Excel.”

Metadata

P2: “Metadata is more from an operational standpoint. It means a compromise between the usual ‘non‐
disaster time’ metadata in a dataset. Working for preparedness you can include more data methodol‐
ogy on how the dataset was created or upgraded.”

Data  sharing  is  fundamental  in  the  aftermath  of  a  disaster,  when  IMOs  from  different  organizations  are 

searching for the same information in parallel. “Information loses value if it is used only by one organisation” (P5). 

Subsequently,  the  “same”  information  can  be  found  from  different  sources;  for  the  coordination  to  be  effec‐

tive, everybody should be using the same datasets. For example, Administrative Boundaries available at Global 

Administrative  Areas  or  HDX  might  not  match  the  datasets  in  use  in  the  country.  “Whatever  is  released  earlier 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO488  |    

F I G U R E   3  Percentage of participants identifying each variable related to data management strategy

becomes the default” (P7). OCHA's main task is compiling datasets with the Coordinated Data Scramble, avoiding 

the duplication of information and facilitating data sharing among all stakeholders.

Even if the concept of open data is gaining strength, in some cases governments try to charge for the datasets 

(P3), or they do not allow OCHA to share them. For example, “The Nepal government only allows sharing under cer‐

tain conditions. Usually, the condition is a disaster happening” (P1). Only after the 2015 Nepal earthquake was OCHA 

allowed to move CODs to HDX (P1). Data sharing is also limited as a result of the emergency situation itself: “There 

is just no time to share information because there are other priorities” (P5). Another limitation to data sharing, that will 

be studied later, is the sensitivity of the information.

Once information is shared, the question is to what extent that information is reliable: “Timeliness versus ac‐

curacy is a great dilemma” (P6). In an emergency environment, information is urgently needed but it might not be 

entirely reliable. It is important to consider: date, where it comes from, and who has created it. Problems with a 

dataset should be explained in the metadata, but this is not always the case. “[…] duplications or information missing 

due to political reasons… That cannot be explained in the metadata, even if it should be” (P1). That is where relation‐

ships and data source contacts become important (Givoni, 2016; Mehta, Bruns, & Newton, 2017).

OCHA policy in terms of metadata has evolved over time: “Dublin metadata standards were an issue around 2010 

and 2011. […] This is worthy but… with the modern GIS systems that can transform on the fly, almost everything is WGS84… 

It is not that important anymore” (P4). Nowadays, data sharing is prioritized if the datasets have enough metadata to be 

useful. For example, Haiti Flood Risk Communes (http://relie fweb.int/map/haiti/ haiti‐flood‐risk‐commu nes‐febru ary‐ 

2015; OCHA, February 2015) did not have information about the indicators driving this map and whether it could be 

used as a proxy for greater damage to precipitation. This issue restricted the use of this dataset during the response 

to Hurricane Matthew. Another matter is the content of the metadata itself. Ensuring consistency of definitions is 

necessary. For example,  during  an epidemic  such  as Ebola, the  terms  “suspected case” and “confirmed  case” may 

be used differently by different organizations. Alternatively, they might use different scales with a different num‐

ber of variables (i.e. 3 types or 2 types…). This means that information among districts is not consistent (P7). “It is 

important to understand the reasons behind those definitions because they are related to the way the organisations work” 

(P7). Language might also be an issue when the local language is other than English, which is commonly used by 

international humanitarian aid organizations. In Haiti, national datasets use French (departments, arrondissements, 

communes, and communal sections), while HDX uses English (Administrative Boundaries 1, 2, and 3). In this regard, 

the work of Translators without Borders was critical during the Hurricane Matthew data scramble.

For IMOs to trust a dataset, the topology should be correct. There should be no problems with the projection 

or contradictions between datasets (P5). For that reason, the cleaning of datasets should be conducted as part of 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  489

a regular scheme. For example, during the response to Hurricane Matthew, an incorrect administrative boundaries 

dataset became a bottleneck. A dataset where the commons of one district were scattered all over Haiti was the 

cause of losing precious time until the problem was identified and fixed. “It was not considered important to work on 

them until something happens” (P5). Moreover, the information should be up‐to‐date. The UN Committee of Experts 

on Global Geospatial Information Management (UN‐GGIM) stated the inequity among countries and pointed to 

outdated  information  as  one  of  the  main  issues  (Konecny,  Breitkopf,  &  Radtke,  2016).  Datasets  might  become 

quickly outdated. Population statistics depend on censuses that are not carried out so often (P1). Administrative 

boundaries might not be updated because of political implications, or just because they change quite often. For 

example: “Kenya has made their data public in a data‐portal; However, political boundaries change so often that they are 

easily outdated” (P1). Therefore, data maintenance becomes another critical task. The operational decisions taken 

should determine the scale of the map within a level of detail that allows maintaining the information. Because 

the level of detail has implications in the cost, time to produce and maintain, and uses for the dataset: “They should 

have enough information to be useful but not too much. Too much detail makes it impossible to maintain” (P5).

In  summary,  a  strategy  with  a  number  of  layers,  data  governance,  and  framework  architecture  is  required 

to ensure that the data have been cured or collected (P8). Standardizing the meaning of data quality and data 

accuracy is necessary: “It is not only the metadata itself but the content of the metadata. What does it mean?” (P8). 

A methodology is required including how information is collected, validated, and updated. The last update and 

consistency of update should be clearly indicated: “[…] whether it was an annual report or one of time survey” (P7). 

“Trustworthy data is the base for any application. But data is not sexy, and applications are. And this is not always un‐

derstood by the decision makers” (P8). In this regard, some IMOs request a known, agreed, single point of truth, a 

predictable schema where data can be consumed as a service (P4, P8).

4.2 | Topics related to geographic information/use of GIS

Table 3 lists examples of the different codes grouped under this heading. The percentage of interviews with oc‐

currences of each topic is presented in Figure 4.

The last three topics listed in Figure 4 are clearly interrelated, because it is a management decision on how to 

use different types of information to adapt the response to the needs and local capacities: “Responders get bom‐

barded with too much information. They do not know what information to use with the priorities they have. Information 

managers should indicate why they are providing that information and how that dataset could be useful for the decision‐

making process. That means providing information rather than data” (P2). The integration of IMOs in the response 

teams  should  improve  this  interaction.  There  are  no  specific  procedures  on  how  the  management  should  use 

geospatial information, but decisions are based on previous experience (P2, P5). Information analysis becomes a 

personal choice of the decision maker in charge. While for some it is a powerful tool, others just use “Excel sheets” 

to produce infographics. Therefore, georeferencing information might be losing importance, restricting the possi‐

bilities of geo‐analysis (P1, P5). In this context, whether the decisions are taken based on sound information or the 

information used to show and justify previously made decisions is a matter for discussion.

In this environment, OCHA's coordination deals with highly political issues, and it needs to work behind the 

scenes, which also affects information management. OCHA tries to find where all the actors are located to pro‐

vide  a  common  operational  picture.  Coordination  is  more  reactive  than  proactive.  It  describes  what  is  already 

happening and, only after, redirects to optimize resources, avoiding accumulation of NGOs in one area or areas 

without support (P7). The response is coordinated through meetings based on the cluster approach. Subsequently, 

each cluster has its internal coordination with the different NGOs. This aspect is challenging for NGOs that work 

in many different areas (i.e. Save the Children works in sanitation, hygiene, health…): “There is a disconnection be‐

tween the way coordination works and the way NGOs implement” (P7). In addition, each cluster collects data in the 

best manner for them, so aggregating that information is also challenging (P7).

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO490  |    

Sensitivity of informa‐
tion (political and 
security implications)

TA B L E   3  Examples of variables related to geographic information/use of GIS

Indicator

Example

OpenStreetMap

P7: “OpenStreetMap used to be the base map for any humanitarian map. The biggest limita‐

tion is reliability. People are reluctant to trust as they are with Wikipedia. There may be user 
errors in the map, for example, information misplaced, roads disconnected… But this is not a 
big deal because it can be cleaned so it can be used as a base‐map.”

P5: “In a dataset about Ebola cases in the world they were using OpenStreetMap as a 

cartographic base. The problem was that in that base Taiwan appeared and this produced a 
diplomatic complaint from China that does not recognise it.” 
P5: “Another restriction to sharing and distribution is security. For example, in Burundi we 
tried to map the location of hospitals through volunteers from CrisisMappers. However, 
there was information that hospitals were the place to kidnap and repress critics to the 
regime after demonstrations. Giving the information on hospital locations could support the 
repressing government.”

Remote sensing

P8: “Imagery is the key to damage assessment. It is becoming easier since a government 

initiative facilitates commercial companies providing post‐disaster imagery.”

Use by management

P5: “In some cases, management may ask for very specific maps orientated to a particular 

meeting, for example founding, coordination…”

Information vs. 

response

information

P1: “The response has changed. In the last 2 years, there have been more ‘cash transfers’. 
Agencies are giving money to the people instead of food or shelter. For this, the location 
of where bases are is necessary, for example, telecommunications, where cell towers are, 
where internet is available…”

these cases, georeferencing is completely out of the picture.” 
P5: “Senior management does not give importance to the geographical localisation; For 
example, they want to know how many hospitals are in a province but they do not care 
where they are.”

GIS vs. other types of 

P5: “Some agencies are using data scientists who work directly on the analysis of the data. In 

F I G U R E   4  Percentage of participants identifying each topic related to geographic information/use of GIS

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  491

The objective of UN IMOs is to provide the best datasets available. Even if some IMOs only use governmental 

data, OpenStreetMap is a vast repository that is often used and trusted (P7). The main advantage of OpenStreetMap 

is accessibility, whereas the main limitation remains reliability. Although there are ways to validate OpenStreetMap 

information to a certain degree, as a minimum it can be used to complement and triangulate existing data and to 

provide a contact person (P1). Moreover, in cases such as the 2015 Nepal earthquake, it was already a common 

source of fundamental geospatial data (Givoni, 2016). Projects such as Missing Maps aim to increase this potential 

through data gathering and the conversion of data into OpenStreetMap formats (P6). Another consideration is the 

license under which a dataset is released. For example, during the response to Hurricane Matthew, datasets had to 

be released into HDX under public domain or Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0), because 

of  the  interoperability  with  the  OpenStreetMap  distribution  license,  ODbL  1.0  (e.g.  Terra  Bela  data  is  released 

under  this  license).  Finally,  data  privacy  is  another  concern  affecting  the  use  of  OpenStreetMap.  Cases  like  the 

bombing of MsF hospitals in Syria demonstrate the risks of making information open to everybody (P7).

Sensitive information should be protected against unwarranted disclosure, which limits data sharing: “People 

want to share but, in a stressful environment, there are concerns about which information can be shared” (P2). There are 

two main reasons for information to become sensitive: security and political. Three categories can be considered: 

data that is so sensitive it cannot be shared with any other organization (i.e. it may have people's names); data that 

is relatively sensitive but can be shared with other humanitarian organizations (these organizations should under‐

stand the limitations in the use of these data); and public data (P2). IMOs are more likely to share datasets with 

people with whom a pre‐disaster relationship had been built. During the Syria conflict, a transnational conflict with 

a myriad of political issues and cross‐boundary operations, NGOs with transboundary activities could not disclose 

their identity to avoid prosecution. The solution was to anonymize data: “Data was made available based on on‐field 

relationships to trust the non‐disclosure of information” (P1). In this regard, the International Committee of the Red 

Cross and Red Crescent developed a handbook on data protection in humanitarian action (Marelli & Kunner, 2017). 

This reference should be considered together with a policy to determine the data that is important to be published 

under any conditions: “Even in very poor security environments, what information do we need to have regardless of the 

risk? For example, health facilities, it does not matter the risk, but the people need to know where they are” (P7).

There are several causes for a dataset to generate political sensitivity. Merging boundaries, partially because 

the  CODs  are  very  country‐specific,  are  one  of  them  (P1).  For  example,  in  the  case  of  India–Pakistan,  the  UN 

office in Pakistan takes the data from the Pakistani government with a border that clearly creates conflicts with a 

politically sensitive UN agency. Frequently, there are public maps on the conflict area and “not so public” (usually 

hardcopy) operational ones (P1).

Remote sensing imagery has become such a fundamental tool for disaster response that it is taken for granted. 

Satellite and aerial and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) imagery, and direct observation in the field, are essential for 

damage assessment. In addition, from satellite imagery, it could be possible to estimate the population considering 

buildings and a basic anthropological knowledge of the local culture (P6). Usually, satellite imagery is provided by 

UNOSAT and Copernicus (information is available at the Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System [GDACS] 

Satellite Mapping Coordination System). There is also imagery from private companies (i.e. Digital Globe, Google, 

and Terra Bella). U.S. agencies NSA/NOAA (i.e. during Hurricane Matthew, they deployed a Global Hawk) and the 

National Geospatial‐Intelligence Agency (NGA) can also provide imagery. OpenStreetMap deploys UAV missions 

so their contributors can perform building damage evaluation from these images (i.e. deployment of Potentiel 3.0 

during the response to Hurricane Matthew).

5 |  CO N C LU S I O N S

The present research taps into IMO opinions to present an empirical study of the joint efforts to provide geospa‐

tial support to disaster response. The limitations identified are mainly related to the selection of the participants. It 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO492  |    

is acknowledged that the initial participants might tend to refer to colleagues with similar opinions. Nevertheless, 

this  limitation  was  minimized  with  the  choice  of  initial  sample  representing  the  different  stakeholders  and  by 

cross‐checking the outcomes with the analysis of the coordination tools and products delivered during the re‐

sponses to emergencies.

The development and widespread use of online mapping, remote sensing, and VGI are influencing the produc‐

tion and data sharing, which is becoming more dynamic, transparent, and decentralized. In this environment, IMOs 

face new challenges. The question is no longer the lack of information, but access to the appropriate information 

at the appropriate time. In this emergency context, information is urgently needed, but it might not be entirely re‐

liable. Good metadata is needed, especially with the possibility of contacting the data source to improve reliability.

IMOs participating in international support to disaster response have a pragmatic approach to geospatial infor‐

mation management. In order to trust a dataset, the topology should be correct, and the information should be up‐

to‐date. Datasets should be cleaned to avoid problems with the projection, or contradictions which could delay the 

delivery of information. Therefore, data maintenance becomes a critical task. Organizations need a solid data manage‐

ment strategy, including data gathering, maintenance, and decision‐making processes based on those data. A known, 

agreed, single point of truth might be necessary; a predictable schema where data can be consumed as a service. A plat‐

form where pre‐agreed datasets are harvested, validated, cleaned, and maintained following a methodology, so they 

are complete, updated, and ready for use. A platform where applications can be plugged in knowing that someone 

is making sure that the data is correct. It could be a web service to be consumed by mobile data collection platforms 

used in the field. Information management is a transversal issue. Nevertheless, each UN agency relies on its own de‐

partment. Further investigation is required to verify whether a unique Information Management Agency/Department 

working for all UN institutions could host this single point of truth and improve the way information is handled.

Until  such  a  platform  is  developed,  OpenStreetMap  is  often  used  because  of  its  accessibility  regardless  of 

limitations, such as reliability and data privacy. Therefore, improving OpenStreetMap improves geospatial pre‐

paredness. Further research is required to find ways to promote community engagement and capacity building to 

assure that the data gathered is maintained and up‐to‐date. The possibility of involving NGOs, as representatives 

of the local community, to improve geospatial preparedness should be explored in order to create a framework 

that could break the dependency on external support. Additionally, research is also needed on the consequences 

of sharing sensitive information through open platforms.

Roberto San Martin 

 https://orcid.org/0000‐0001‐6096‐343X 

Marco Painho 

 https://orcid.org/0000‐0003‐1136‐3387 

O R C I D

R E F E R E N C E S

Basiri, A., Jackson, M., Amirian, P., Pourabdollah, A., Sester, M., Winstanley, A., … Zhang, L. (2016). Quality assessment of 

OpenStreetMap data using trajectory mining. Geo‐Spatial Information Science, 19(1), 56–68.

Bittner,  C.  (2017).  OpenStreetMap  in  Israel  and  Palestine:  ‘Game  changer’  or  reproducer  of  contested  cartographies? 

Political Geography, 57, 34–48.

Boccardo, P., & Tonolo, F. G. (2015). Remote sensing role in emergency mapping for disaster response. In G. Lollino, A. 
Manconi, F. Guzzetti, M. Culshaw, P. T. Bobrowsky, & F. Luino (Eds.), Engineering geology for society and territory: Urban 
geology, sustainable planning and landscape exploitation (Vol. 5, pp. 17–24). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.

Campbell, H. (2017). Coordinated data scramble. Retrieved from https ://www.youtu be.com/watch ?v=HmsF7 43VRX0
Carpenter, J., & Snell, J. (2013). Future trends in geospatial information management: The five to ten year vision. Southampton, 

Convergne, E., & Snyder, M. R. (2015). Making maps to make peace: Geospatial technology as a tool for UN peacekeeping. 

UK: Ordnance Survey.

International Peacekeeping, 22(5), 565–586.

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO    |  493

de Albuquerque, J. P., Herfort, B., & Eckle, M. (2016). The tasks of the crowd: A typology of tasks in geographic informa‐

tion crowdsourcing and a case study in humanitarian mapping. Remote Sensing, 8(10), 859.

Denscombe, M. (2014). The good research guide for small‐scale social research projects (5th ed.). Maidenhead, UK: Open 

DHS. (2014). Homeland security geospatial concept of operations (GeoCONOPS, Version 6). Washington, DC: U.S. Department 

University Press & McGraw‐Hill Education.

of Homeland Security.

Dittus, M., Quattrone, G., & Capra, L. (2017). Mass participation during emergency response: Event‐centric crowdsourc‐
ing in humanitarian mapping. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Computer‐Supported Cooperative Work and 
Social Computing (pp. 1290–1303). Portland, OR: ACM.

Eckle, M., & de Albuquerque, J. P. (2015). Quality assessment of remote mapping in OpenStreetMap for disaster man‐
agement  purposes.  In  Proceedings  of  the  12th  International  Conference  on  Information  Systems  for  Crisis  Response  & 
Management. Kristiansand, Norway: USCRAM.

Givoni, M. (2016). Between micro mappers and missing maps: Digital humanitarianism and the politics of material partic‐

ipation in disaster response. Environment & Planning D, 34(6), 1025–1043.

Gray, N., Stringer, B., & Jobanputra, K. (2017). Missing Maps: What happened next? Retrieved from https ://f1000 resea rch.

com/slide s/6‐703

Compass, 9(5), 237–250.

Haworth, B., & Bruce, E. (2015). A review of volunteered geographic information for disaster management. Geography 

Herfort, B., Eckle, M., & de Albuquerque, J. P. (2016). Being specific about geographic information crowdsourcing: A ty‐
pology and analysis of the Missing Maps project in South Kivu. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: ISCRAM.

Inter‐Agency  Standing  Committee.  (2015).  Multi‐sector  initial  rapid  assessment  guidance.  Retrieved  from  https ://inter 

agenc ystan dingc ommit tee.org/syste m/files/ mira_2015_final.pdf

Kawasaki, A., Berman, M. L., & Guan, W. (2013). The growing role of web‐based geospatial technology in disaster re‐

Koch, T. (2015). Mapping medical disasters: Ebola makes old lessons, new. Disaster Medicine & Public Health Preparedness, 

sponse and support. Disasters, 37(2), 201–221.

9(1), 66–73.

Konecny,  G.,  Breitkopf,  U.,  &  Radtke,  A.  (2016).  The  status  of  topographic  mapping  in  the  world:  A  UNGGIM‐ISPRS 
Project  2012–2015.  International  Archives  of  the  Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  &  Spatial  Information  Sciences, 
41(B4), 737–741.

Lovon, M., & Austin, L. (2016). OCHA coordinated assessment support section: Review of coordinated assessment and joint 

analysis processes and outputs. Geneva, Switzerland: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Marelli, M., & Kunner, C. (Eds.) (2017). Handbook on data protection in humanitarian action. Retrieved from www.icrc.org
Mehta, A. M., Bruns, A., & Newton, J. (2017). Trust, but verify: Social media models for disaster management. Disasters, 

41(3), 549–565.

Press.

Meier, P. (2015). Digital humanitarians: How big data is changing the face of humanitarian response. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 

Missing Maps. (2017). Missing maps. Retrieved from http://www.missi ngmaps.org
Miyazaki, H., Nagai, M., & Shibasaki, R. (2015). Reviews of geospatial information technology and collaborative data de‐

livery for disaster risk management. ISPRS International Journal of Geo‐Information, 4, 1936–1964.

Moore, R. (2016). Coordinated data scramble: Case studies from Haiti, Ecuador, Nepal and West Africa. In Proceedings of 

the GeOnG Forum. Chambery, France.

Neis, P., & Zielstra, D. (2014). Recent developments and future trends in volunteered geographic information research: 

The case of OpenStreetMap. Future Internet, 6(1), 76–106.

Norris, J. (2015). Future trends in geospatial information management: The five to ten year vision. Retrieved from http://ggim.

un.org/

OCHA  CASS.  (2016).  Proposed  protocols  for  joint  analysis  in  sudden‐onset  and  in  protracted  crises.  Geneva,  Switzerland: 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Coordinated Assessment Support Section.
Poiani, T. H., Rocha, R. D. S., Degrossi, L. C., & de Albuquerque, J. P. (2016). Potential of collaborative mapping for disas‐
ter relief: A case study of OpenStreetMap in the Nepal earthquake, 2015. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 188–197). Kauai, HI: IEEE.

Poorazizi, M. E., Hunter, A. J. S., & Steiniger, S. (2015). A volunteered geographic information framework to enable bot‐

tom‐up disaster management platforms. ISPRS International Journal of Geo‐Information, 4, 1389–1422.

Qadir, J., Ali, A., Rasool, R., Zwitter, A., Sathiaseelan, A., & Crowcroft, J. (2016). Crisis analytics: Big data‐driven crisis 

response. Journal of International Humanitarian Action, 1, 12.

Raymond, N. A., & Al Achkar, Z. (2017). Data preparedness: Connecting data, decision making and humanitarian response. 
Retrieved  from  http://hhi.harva rd.edu/publi catio ns/data‐prepa redne ss‐conne cting‐data‐decis ionma king‐and‐hu‐
man itari an‐response

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO494  |    

Robinson, A. C., Demšar, U., Moore, A. B., Buckley, A., Jiang, B., Field, K., … Sluter, C. R. (2017). Geospatial big data and 
cartography: Research challenges and opportunities for making maps that matter. International Journal of Cartography, 
3(Suppl. 1), 32–60.

San  Martin,  R.  (2014).  Information  management  in  disaster  and  development:  Geographic  information  systems.  Retrieved 

from http://www.repos itory.utl.pt/bitst ream/10400.5/7044/1/CEsA‐WP125.pdf

San Martin, R., & Painho, M. (2016). Inequity and development in geospatial preparedness. In Proceedings of the 22nd 
Annual  International  Sustainable  Development  Research  Society  Conference  on  Rethinking  Sustainability  Models  and 
Practices: Challenges for the New and Old World Contexts (Vol. 3, pp. 12–24). Lisbon, Portugal: ISDRS.

San Martin, R., & Painho, M. (2018). Geospatial preparedness: Empirical study of alternative sources of information for 

the humanitarian community. Journal of Homeland Security & Emergency Management, 16, in press.

See, L., Mooney, P., Foody, G., Bastin, L., Comber, A., Estima, J., … Rutzinger, M. (2016). Crowdsourcing, citizen science or 
volunteered geographic information? The current state of crowdsourced geographic information. ISPRS International 
Journal of Geo‐Information, 5(5), 55.

Sehra, S. S., Singh, J., & Rai, H. S. (2017). Assessing OpenStreetMap data using intrinsic quality indicators: An extension 

to the QGIS processing toolbox. Future Internet, 9(2), 15.

Soden,  R.,  &  Palen,  L.  (2014).  From  crowdsourced  mapping  to  community  mapping:  The  post‐earthquake  work  of 
OpenStreetMap  Haiti.  In  C.  Rossitto,  L.  Ciolfi,  D.  Martin,  &  B.  Conein  (Eds.),  COOP  2014:  Proceedings  of  the  11th 
International  Conference  on  the  Design  of  Cooperative  Systems,  27–30  May  2014,  Nice  (France)  (pp.  27–30).  Cham, 
Switzerland: Springer.

Soden, R., & Palen, L. (2016). Infrastructure in the wild: What mapping in post‐earthquake Nepal reveals about infra‐
structural emergence. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 
2796–2807). San Jose, CA: ACM.

Tilanus, P. (2016). COBACORE report summary. Retrieved from http://cordis.europa.eu/resul t/rcn/192574_en.html
Tomaszewski, B., Judex, M., Szarzynski, J., Radestock, C., & Wirkus, L. (2015). Geographic information systems for disas‐

ter response: A review. Journal of Homeland Security & Emergency Management, 12(3), 1–32.

Turk,  C.  (2016).  Cartographica  incognita:  ‘Dijital  Jedis’,  satellite  salvation  and  the  mysteries  of  the  ‘Missing  Maps’. 

UN. (2015). Budget for the support account peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016. Geneva, 

Cartographic Journal, 54(1), 14–23.

Switzerland: United Nations.

van den Homberg, M. (2017). Toward a Balkans’ data for disaster management collaborative? In O. Nikolov & S. Veeravalli 

(Eds.), Implications of climate change and disasters on military activities (pp. 11–18). Berlin, Germany: Springer.

van den Homberg, M., & Neef, R. M. (2015). Towards novel community‐based collaborative disaster management ap‐
proaches in the new information environment: An NGO perspective. In Proceedings of the Davos Global Risk Forum 
(pp. 185–191). Davos, Switzerland.

van den Homberg, M., Visser, J., & van der Veen, M. (2017). Unpacking data preparedness from a humanitarian decision 
making perspective: Toward an assessment framework at subnational level. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management. Albi, France.

Verity,  A.  (2017).  Verity  think  blog.  Retrieved  from  http://blog.verit ythink.com/post/14595 73708 79/i‐scram ble‐you‐

scram ble‐we‐allsc ramble‐for

Engineering, 78, 29–39.

Westrope,  C.,  Banick,  R.,  &  Levine,  M.  (2014).  Groundtruthing  OpenStreetMap  building  damage  assessment.  Procedia 

WG‐Disasters UN‐GGIM. (2016a). Draft review of frameworks, rules, legislation, and policies on geospatial information and 

services for disasters. Retrieved from http://ggim.un.org/

WG‐Disasters UN‐GGIM. (2016b). Draft strategic framework on geospatial information and services for disasters 2016‐2030. 

Retrieved from http://ggim.un.org/

How to cite this article: San Martin R, Painho M. Geospatial preparedness: Empirical study of the joint 

effort to provide geospatial support to disaster response. Transactions in GIS. 2019;23:481–494. https ://

doi.org/10.1111/tgis.12537 

SAN MARTIN ANd PAINHO